ChromeSA has noted a number of egregious misconceptions, omissions and inaccuracies contained in media reports regarding a proposed chrome ore export tax and its impacts on the industry. ChromeSA considers the complete absence of consideration given to the destructive impact which such a tax would have on South Africa’s primary and UG2 chrome ore producers to be a gross omission, given that they sell the bulk of their production for export. Read:What you need to know about chrome export tax It is clear that insufficient thought has been given to the financial consequences of such a tax – and its inevitable impacts on direct employment, on associated industries such as transport and logistics, on the indirect jobs that will be affected, and on communities. Of further concern to ChromeSA is that there is no clear benefit to the ferrochrome producers themselves from the proposed tax. Any suggested benefits would at best be short-term and would be rapidly eroded by the significant negative impact South Africa’s ever-increasing electricity tariffs continue to have on local beneficiation. Read more about platinum group metals ChromeSA is also extremely concerned by the apparent failure by those working on the proposed tax to engage meaningfully on this issue, seemingly oblivious of the consequences of a tax on primary and UG2 chrome ore producers, their employees and their communities. ChromeSA is calling for a comprehensive and transparent engagement process with all affected parties before the proposal is developed any further. It is the view of ChromeSA that the proposed tax is entirely speculative as regards the outcomes its supporters expect it to achieve, and that several significant incorrect assumptions have been made by the proponents of the tax. These include – That SA chrome ore producers have such extreme market dominance that they are able to pass on the export tax to Chinese ferrochrome producers without losing sales in the export market (thus, an assumption of no harm to SA chrome ore producers). ChromeSA takes issue with this assumption based on the following argument: That the tax on SA chrome ore will undermine the competitiveness of the Chinese ferrochrome sector to the advantage SA ferrochrome producers. ChromeSA would like to correct this view: That the export tax will lead to a dramatic increase in revenue for SA ferrochrome producers, improving the sustainability of operations. ChromeSA asserts that: ChromeSA also believes that the assumptions by government and others about the availability and cost of electricity – which is seen as supporting local beneficiation with a hypothetical South African ferrochrome production boom, increasing production almost threefold to 10 million tons – are deeply flawed. Simply put, Eskom in its current state is in no way equipped to support a ferrochrome industry performing in the manner anticipated by the government. So, while the benefits of the proposed tax are entirely speculative, the cost that would be imposed on non-integrated chrome ore producers is certain, direct and will have significant negative output and employment impacts. This at a time when South Africa is attempting to stimulate economic growth, recover from COVID-19 and encourage investment in mining activities. Indeed, a core tenet of the country’s recovery plan, as presented by President Ramaphosa, are actions to increase the competitiveness of exports. The proposed tax, by design, does exactly the opposite. ChromeSA and its constituent companies are open to all necessary engagements, and to assisting in finding a sector-wide solution, but not at the expense of the future of our employees, communities and investments. It is committed to strongly protecting those constituencies.