Women in Mining UK on 19 November published the 2020 edition of its biennial 100 Global Inspirational Women in Mining list, which featured 22 inspirational women from the African mining sector. The 100 Global Inspirational Women in Mining (WIM100) publication celebrates the “above & beyond” contributions of women to the global mining industry, across all roles, seniority and jurisdictions. These women have been chosen because they are trailblazers, fierce advocates of others and/or have persevered in the face of adversity. The 2020 edition, sponsored by BMO Capital Markets, BCG, IBM and Heidrick & Struggles, is the third edition of the WIM100 publication, which highlights the incredible diversity of talent in mining. WIM UK believes that the recognition and celebration of these inspirational women and their stories are integral to changing attitudes in the mining sector. WIM UK received more than 1 100 nominations for 626 women in mining working at 356 companies across 60 countries. The nominations were roughly equally split between Africa, Asia Pacific, Europe/Middle East, Latin America, and North America.  The number of nominations and the number of women nominated are by far the highest received since WIM UK launched the publication in 2013. The 100 successful nominees came from more than 30 countries and the 22 African women are from10 countries across the continent. The nominations came from all areas of the mining sector – mining companies, technical, operational, commercial and support services, academia, government, and industry associations. “The 626 nominees have inspired more than 1,100 men and women and we hope through the WIM100 book they will inspire many more to enter the mining industry, progress their career, and advocate for change to ensure inclusion and diversity are entrenched in every company’s culture and strategy around the world,” says WIM UK Chair, Carole Cable. Read more: Minerals Council launches first National Day of Women in Mining The 2020 edition and previous editions of the WIM100 publication are available at https://www.womeninmining.org.uk/wim100/ Listen below to our Deep Insight podcast where we speak to the women behind WiMSA