Vibramech recently secured its largest single order in the company’s history. This is the supply of over 30 units of vibrating equipment to the latest state-of-the-art marine diamond processing vessel in 2020. The equipment in question ranges from heavy duty/high capacity primary scalping screens to diamond recovery feeders. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 11, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here The large primary scalping screens (the largest operational on sea going processing plants) have been methodically designed and tailor-made for this specific application, and have been designed using the latest finite element and strain gauge techniques. Related:Continuous engineering provides improved robustnessVibramech: A trusted supplier to Australian miners in AfricaVibramech: customized designs optimize minerals processing These particular exciters are specially adapted for marine conditions, in that the exciter weights are protected with stainless steel guards, the studs are given additional anti-corrosion protections and provision is made to monitor the oil levels and the client is able to adapt the quality of the lubrication, in an easily accessible manner. The order is an indication of the success that company enjoys as a result of continuous engineering developments that provide improved robustness. Vibramech’s engineering developments have led to substantially improved wear resistance (on its range of vibrating equipment supplied to the marine diamond processing industry), by the use of special features such as huck collar protection, abundant use of stainless steel and galvanised components, thicker side plates, rubber lining on the complete internal surface of the side plates and ceramic coating on all internal exposed surfaces, which are not wear protected by rubber lining. Read more about mining for diamonds Worldwide reach Vibramech is southern Africa’s largest manufacturer of vibrating mineral processing equipment. The company furthermore supplies its equipment to mining and minerals processing industries throughout Africa, Eurasia, Australasia, North and South America. The company’s equipment is operating in processing plants, ocean vessels and mining operations world-wide, and it has extensive experience in gold, diamond, coal, iron ore, manganese, platinum, chrome, nickel, uranium, copper, mineral sands and aggregate operations. Vibramech has developed a proven and comprehensive range of vibrating equipment, including, but not limited to: multislope (or banana) screens, horizontal and inclined screens, dewatering screens, primary and secondary sizing screens, crusher product screens, degrit screens, floats and sinks screens, classifying screens, XRT and X-ray prep screens and feeders, DMS feeders, grizzly feeders, pan feeders, tubular feeders and grease tables. As sound dynamic behaviour is essential to ensure vibrating equipment reliability, all equipment is built to perform within strict dynamic parameters. All internal mating surfaces are machined in order to maintain stringent dimensional tolerances. In addition, the company’s quality assurance programme makes provision for a full 3D vibration analysis to be conducted on all equipment prior to release. This is used as a benchmark for the life of the equipment. All equipment is manufactured in-house by Vibramech, in its factory in Chamdor, 35 km west of Johannesburg. Almost every piece of equipment is tailor-made to suit a client’s specific requirements, from both a plant layout viewpoint and process considerations. A present staff complement of over 200 control all activities from sales through to engineering and manufacturing. Vibramech’s field services department continues to service all equipment supplied into the field. It also has established regional offices in eMalahleni and Lephalale to service new and existing clients in the Limpopo and Mpumalanga Provinces. It also has a permanent sales engineer stationed in Letlhakane, Botswana to provide support throughout Botswana.