For the 13th year in a row, Newmont Corporation joins the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index (DJSI World), representing the top 10% of the globe’s largest 2,500 companies in the S&P Global Broad Market Index. DJSI World membership is based on long-term economic factors, as well as leading environmental, social and governance (ESG) performance evaluated through the 2020 SAM Corporate Sustainability Assessment (CSA). The 2020 CSA results also place Newmont as the top-ranked gold miner for the sixth consecutive year. The ranking is based upon Newmont’s performance in calendar year 2019. Read more about gold Newmont recently announced industry-leading greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals of 30% by 2030, with the ultimate goal of being net zero carbon emissions by 2050. “Newmont’s commitment to ESG is fundamental, it is part of the company’s fabric and history, and is essential to our license to operate,” says Tom Palmer, President and CEO of Newmont. Related:Newmont commits to industry-leading climate targets “I am extremely proud of our employees for their strong commitment to our purpose of creating value and improving lives through sustainable and responsible mining. “We are honoured to continue our DJSI World membership, and to have earned top gold miner distinction in the CSA. This honour comes with the recognition that we must continue to challenge ourselves to further improve and deliver on our commitments for all of our stakeholders.” The CSA assesses companies’ quality of management and future performance potential by evaluating 24 categories of financially material sustainability information. The results allow investors to integrate ESG factors into their investment decisions, and identify those companies that are well-positioned to address current and future sustainability-driven challenges and opportunities. Read more about ESG In addition to top gold miner ranking, Newmont earned top decile performance in 19 of the 24 CSA performance categories, and 100th percentile results for sector-leading practices in the following areas: “We congratulate Newmont Corporation for being included in the DJSI World index. A DJSI distinction is a reflection of being a sustainability leader in your industry. “With a record number of companies participating in the 2020 Corporate Sustainability Assessment and more stringent rules for inclusion this year, this sets your company apart and rewards your continued commitment to people and planet,” says Manjit Jus, Global Head of ESG Research and Data, S&P Global.