LSE and ASX-listed base metal explorer Castillo Copper has confirmed eight priority targets at its 100% owned Mkushi project in Zambia’s copper-belt following its recently completed systematic infill soil sampling campaign. The campaign, which comprised 702 infill samples analysed using a portable XRF analyser, was conducted to reduce the spacing between samples and lines and derive a better understanding of copper anomalism apparent within the tenure boundaries. Including previous work, some 1 899 samples have been collected across two campaigns. The Mkushi project contiguously surrounds an operating open-pit copper mine in a region proven to be highly prospective for copper-gold mineralisation. Results confirmed eight target areas with significant copper anomalism and strike lengths, ranging between 1.5 km and 4.2 km, which extend known mineralisation compared with the January 2020 campaign. With the completion of two comprehensive soil sample campaigns, which have delivered encouraging findings, an induced polarization (IP) survey will be deployed to identify geophysical anomalies and delineate potential targets. Once the IP survey results are finalised and reconciled with findings from the soil sampling campaigns, the Zambian geology team should be able to refine test-drilling targets. In addition, work on the drilling campaign at the Big One Deposit in Australia is gathering momentum and an update is expected shortly. Castillo Copper MD Simon Paull, who issimultaneously progress exploration programmes in both Zambia and Australia, says that while the next phase of work in Zambia is geophysics for our Luanshya and Mkushi properties, the company is currently actively drilling the Big One Deposit within the Mt Oxide project. “Importantly, we are getting solid results out of Zambia and now have eight priority targets across the Mkushi project that we could be test-drilling in 2021,” says Paull. Castillo Copper’s UK-based director Ged Hall says the soil anomaly results from Mkushi are highly encouraging since they extend mineralisation along strike from a known operating copper mine.