Africa Mining Forum gathers 1200+ mining stakeholders engaging in packed sessions! The Africa Mining Forum Digital Event that is taking place this week until Friday, 20 November, has more than delivered on its promise to reinvent digital conferencing and gathering the who’s who of the continent’s mining stakeholders, from government, to finance gurus to junior miners and established mining powerhouses. “We knew that we would have to provide a totally different experience for our clients and attendees,” says event manager Elodie Delagneau, “and we have combined the top content that our audience has become accustomed to from us and combined it with a responsive digital platform and high production values. “The feedback we have been getting is incredible and it is so exciting to watch our expert panellists get involved in animated exchanges and they look forward to answering the informed and challenging questions from the audience. There’s nothing like a live broadcast!” Programme highlights so far include below sessions, which are all available to review via the “watch again” function on Africa Mining Forum’s digital platform: Monday, 16 November: Opening keynote: “The next smart move: COVID-19 recovery plan to stimulate investment into mining exploration in Africa”While the COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented disruption to African mining operations, the inaugural Africa Mining Forum (AMF) digital event provides the perfect opportunity for key sector players to engage meaningfully with each other over a five-day period. This is according to Hon. Francis Gatare, CEO of Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board. Read more. The Africa/Australia mining connection: What do investors have in mind?“The Australians are leading the pack in terms of EDG principles and there are some fantastic programmes between Australia and Africa” – William Witham, CEO, AAMEG“There is a lot of Investment money floating around looking for a home, and looking for risk on which it can be rewarded” -Ben Gargett, Partner, PwC. Also read. Beyond gold: West Africa’s potential to feed the emerging battery metals marketAnalysts were rather pessimistic about battery metals and electric vehicles during the early stages of COVID-19 due to economic turmoil, possible austerity plans that would remove subsidy policies and concerns that vehicle manufacturers would delay their electric vehicle plans in order to preserve their balance sheets, compounded by a decrease in automotive sales and consumer demand. Despite these fears, none of these fears materialised, noted George Heppel, senior analyst for cobalt, lithium and nickel at CRU Group. Read more. Tuesday, 17 November: “Made in Africa: Building a solid beneficiation industry to deliver better return on investment.”“We had been looking at the tin industry for quite some time before investing in LuNa Smelter, which is the only tin smelter on the continent,” said  Aleksandra Cholewa, Director of Investment & Development at Luma Holding. “We also recognised Rwanda’s strategy and efforts to become a hub in the region, especially for the 3Ts. LuNa Smelter in Rwanda shows that beneficiation is possible in the country.” Read more. Managing ESG compliance and investor expectationsDeveloping a financially profitable project is no longer the only key aspect investors are considering to fund new projects. Mining companies’ ability to comply with environmental, social and governance components is today an equal investment consideration. Terence, Errol and Rudolph were on the same page when it comes to understanding what ESG is, and what it is not. “You can still make good money and be a sustainable business, but again, there is no one size fits all”. Reshaping energy capital flows to drive positive investment into miningEnergy and mining are intrinsically linked to guarantee the performance of mining operations, assisting in mitigating large operating costs and contributing to the sustainability of business operations, as well as creating a greater social impact on the communities around which mining companies operate. “Who’s come to save the day? Off grid solutions that support mining operations and reduce emissions. Mining companies can reduce 50% of their emissions with renewables and they will be the cheaper options, it makes absolute business sense.” – Kwasi Ampofo, Metals Analyst, Bloomberg L. P. Here are Africa Mining Forum’s upcoming spotlight sessions and forums for the rest of the week. Registrations are open and free of charge: Wednesday, 18 November: – How do you prepare for tomorrow’s mine today? – 11h00 SAST – sponsored by Basil Read Mining – Raising lucrative capital for juniors in Africa – 13h00 SAST – sponsored by Catoca – End-to-end mineral tracking: deploying blockchain as a way of increasing transparency in the supply chain – 15h00 SAST – sponsored by LuNa Smelter Thursday, 19 November: – Ministerial Forum – 11h00 SAST – Women in Mining – 13h00 SAST – Counting on copper: Renewable energy and EV boom drive demand – 15h00 SAST – brought to you by DRC Mining Week Friday, 20 November: – Attracting responsible mining and natural resources investment in the Great Lakes region in a pandemic environment. – 12h30 SAST – in partnership with Africapractice, ICGLR and the UN REGISTER here to view the full agenda. Industry supportAldango Gold Refinery is the returning diamond sponsor for the Africa Mining Forum Digital Event, while LuNa Smelter is once again the gold sponsor. The event is also supported by bronze sponsors Basil Read Mining, BKT, Catoca, GTK, HTDS, Secon Sonic Technology and Sodeico. About Africa Mining ForumEarlier this year the mining industry gained an exciting new multi-touchpoint partner when Africa Mining Forum transformed into a year-round platform, providing engagement and content for 365 days a year, covering all corners of the continent’s junior mining activities and opportunities. This mining investment platform has its roots in the very successful East & Central Africa Mining Forum, which took place in Kigali last year, hosted by the Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (RMB). Event organiser Clarion Events Africa is a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Other well-known events by Clarion Events Africa include DRC Mining Week, Nigeria Mining Week, African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa, Utility CEO Forums, Future Energy East Africa and Future Energy Nigeria. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group. African Mining Forum dates and location:Digital event: 16-20 November 2020Onsite event in Kigali: November 2021 Website: https://www.africaminingforum.com/Twitter:  https://twitter.com/MiningForumAfrFacebook:  https://www.facebook.com/africaminingforum  LinkedIN: Africa Mining Forum Media contact:Senior communications manager: Annemarie RoodbolOffice: +27 21 700 3558Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com