Increased safety and productivity while loading and unloading trucks is easier to deliver at mines thanks to an innovative product new developed and produced in Bendigo. The Australian Turntable Company (ATC) has developed a relocatable truck turntable that can be used below or above ground, eliminating the need to reverse vehicles in confined spaces. According to ATC executive and founder Paul Chapman the truck turntable reduces the path travelled when hauling materials and makes unloading vehicles about 30 per cent faster, and that increases efficiency. “In some instances, the equivalent production can be achieved by a smaller fleet.” By using a turntable, the reversing procedure is eliminated, resulting in improved driver vision with no blind spots. Chapman says driver fatigue is also reduced and that means increased safety for miners. “We came up with idea during a trip to Chile where we saw the bottleneck created as big trucks queued to unload.” Two turntables are operating at Western Australian maintenance facilities and one 20-metre diameter truck turntable has been installed at a Columbian cement quarry. “Testimonials from Colombia indicate that large truck movements on-site have increased by 300%.”. Chapman says that sites with space constraints, like in many mines in South America and India, stand to benefit most from the truck turntable. IMARC Online provides a unique opportunity to showcase Victorian METS innovations like the truck turntable to a global audience. “We hope to install the turntable at mines across the globe in the next few years and we’ll be focusing on markets in India, Chile, Colombia and the US at IMARC.” ATC is a regionally based advanced manufacturer that employs 32 people and regularly conducts research to discover new ways to add value to its customers operations. The company is an example of how Victoria’s mining support sector is helping address some of the industry’s greatest challenges. You can find out more about relocatable truck turntable at the Victorian Government’s virtual booth at the International Mining and Resources Conference (IMARC) Online which is on now until the 27th of November 2020 or watch a video demonstrating its efficiency. The International Mining and Resources Conference (IMARC) is where global mining leaders connect with technology, finance and the future. IMARC Online brings together decision makers, mining leaders, policy makers, investors, mining buyers, technical experts, innovators and educators from the global mining and resources community together to interact, network, learn and engage. With the event being online, attendees are no longer constrained by geographic boundaries, allowing for even more international attendees than ever before. IMARC is developed in collaboration with its founding partners the Victorian State Government of Australia, Austmine, AusIMM and Mines and Money. For further information please visit imarconline.com