Several pertinent topics regarding the Rwandan mining industry were highlighted during Africa Mining Forum’s media briefing on 10 November 2020. How do mining companies operate in East Africa’s mineral rich regions and how can investment be channelled accordingly? Results from an audience poll held during Mining Review Africa and Africa Mining Forum’s live panel discussion on the hottest mining investment destinations in East Africa (listen to the webinar here) indicated that the region holds plenty of mining promise. Rwanda (37%), Tanzania (27%) and Ethiopia (24%) were voted as the most attractive countries to deliver the biggest return on investment. East Africa includes Tanzania, Rwanda, and Ethiopia, and is home to some of the most in-demand metals and minerals, yet in spite of this, it remains largely unexplored. Hon. Francis Gatare, CEO of Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board, highlighted that the mining sector has been quick to resume activity, albeit at lower volumes since the easing of lockdown protocols. “The board’s vision remains intact and the country is determined to build a strong and profitable mining industry that contributes on a larger scale towards Rwanda’s GDP, while aligning with the Africa Mining Vision,” he explained. The Africa Mining Vision enables African nations to negotiate contracts with mining multinationals that generate fair resource rents and stipulate local inputs for operations. At a regional level, this means integrating mining into industrial and trade policy. As far as mining investment is concerned, Gatare believes Rwanda has the perfect recipe to attract investment for junior miners, owing to the fact that its Mining Code has recently seen revisions that cater specifically to the sector. The panel of mining representatives on the media briefing included: These esteemed speakers will share further insights into the African mining investment landscape during the 2020 Africa Mining Forum digital event, taking place from 16 – 20 November. The event is being co-hosted and sponsored by the Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board. Register for your virtual seat to the 2020 Africa Mining Forum digital event here.