Exxaro has donated 200 masks to returning learners and teachers at Emasangweni Primary School in Mamelodi. After months of home-schooling and e-learning, South African learners in their final years of primary and high school, are finally back in the classroom as the COVID-19 lockdown is eased. On Monday 8 June, most public and independent schools across the country reopened with grade 7 and 12 students being the first group to be phased in. Another cluster of grades is set to return to school on 6 July with the final pupils filtering in on 3 August. With this in mind, a group of six Exxaro employees came together to donate 200 masks to the Grade 7 learners and teachers at Emasangweni Primary School.  Handmade with care, these protective masks will help limit the spread of COVID-19. Read: Exxaro responds to COVID-19 pandemic [subhead] Giving back to host communities This is not the first time that Exxaro has assisted the Pretoria-based school. Through the Partners for Possibility Programme, the mining company previously mentored Emasangweni’s principal Maiphephi Ndhlahla, empowering her to become a change leader in the school and surrounding community. The mask donation marks one of the many ways Exxaro is investing in education and giving back to their host communities. In 2019, alone, the mining group spent a total of R28.23 million on education initiatives, including the sponsorship of university research chairs, academic programmes, and infrastructure development for basic education. “As a corporate citizen of our country, we strive to be a key partner in national risk mitigation. We are dedicated to our nation and are working tirelessly to ensure the survival and growth of our people,” explained Mzila Mthenjane, executive head of Stakeholder Affairs at Exxaro. “This donation was only a small contribution. Imagine the kind of impact we could have if we all joined hands to empower South Africa when it matters the most. Let us be the change we want to see in Africa, and beyond,” Mthenjane concluded.