Dual-listed Tanzanian Gold Corporation has reached commercial gold production level at the oxide ore processing plant at the Buckreef gold project in Tanzania. The first bucket of oxide ore was mined from the oxide open pit on 6 April 2020. Since then, the oxide ore has been stockpiled at a ROM pad. Construction of the plant ended on 28 May 2020 followed by successful cold and hot commissioning and the plant has now reached commercial production. The plant is being operated 24/7 under two 12-hour operating shifts per day. A public tender for an increase in the treatment capacity of the oxide gold processing plant was recently completed and the company is planning to start construction to increase the processing capacity of the oxide plant by approximately 200% in the fourth quarter of this year. “I am delighted that we have achieved this important milestone in our gold production growth plan,” says Tanzanian Gold Corporation executive chairman James E. Sinclair. “We are now well positioned to increase the production of gold significantly and to accelerate our final feasibility on bringing a second, much larger plant on-line to produce more gold from processing the sulphide ore,” he added. SGS-Lakefield will soon start comprehensive metallurgical testing at the Buckreef gold project on the project’s sulphide mineralisation. The aim of this is to finalise a flow-sheet for the design of a large gold processing plant that will be the basis for the final feasibility study of the Buckreef project. The company believes that the new sulphide processing plant could produce in the range of 150 000 to 175 000 ozpa. The company has shipped fresh core from three metallurgical test holes drilled in 2019 to the SGS Lakefield site to confirm a conceptual flow-sheet that includes either gravity separation with gravity tailing cyanidation, or gravity separation, followed by sulphide flotation of the gravity tailing, with regrinding and cyanide leaching of reground sulphide concentrate along with possible leaching of flotation tailing. The current round of testing is expected to take approximately five to six months, following which some additional sampling and variability testing may be required that would arise from the design of a new open pit which will be initiated shortly.