ASX-listed Walkabout Resources has secured exploration tenure over a highly-prospective, underexplored gold region in south western Tanzania. The Amani gold project within this gold region has been a focus of Walkabout’s exploration team since 2015 when new geological mapping and fieldwork confirmed the hard rock gold potential of this forgotten alluvial gold area, where historical evidence exists of hard rock shaft gold exploitation pre-dating WWI. READ MORE: Walkabout Resources continues funding negotiations for Lindi Jumbo The area has the potential to host high-grade orogenic gold mineralisation similar to the Lupa Goldfields where Shanta Gold has numerous deposits. To complement the granted prospecting licence, the company has submitted three applications in the area covering an area in excess of 830 km2. The area includes clusters of Primary Mining Licences for raw gold, gold, and gold and copper normally associated with the alluvial occurrences or in some cases for primary hard-rock gold. Other active licence applications in the area are mainly for iron to the north of the Amani application area (Linganga iron deposit) and coal to the south. Read more about gold Walkabout considers this project to be a valuable addition to its diverse mineral exploration portfolio in Africa and the UK. According to Walkabout Resources chairman Trevor Benson, the company’s strategy has always been to maintain a diversified portfolio and continually look for high value exploration opportunities. “We believe the Amani gold project with its significant alluvial gold endowment will potentially provide significant value to the company while not distracting us from the funding and building of the Lindi Jumbo graphite project,” says Benson. Amani project at a glance Located approximately 125 km south of the agricultural centre of Njombe and 50 km east of Lake Malawi, in southwestern Tanzania, alluvial gold nuggets were historically recovered from the Amani area. As a result of this, processing of hard rock material was never a priority despite gold in quartz veins and rubble within the alluvial mining area. It is estimated by geologists familiar with the area, that in excess of 2.5 t of gold nuggets have been removed by artisanal miners from a 2 km stretch of riverbed in only one of the alluvial mining areas within the Walkabout application area. The mining and recovery methods used by the artisanal miners were rudimentary with no mercury used in the recovery process. Most of the fine gold was lost and recoveries were estimated to be between 30-40%. Sporadic and small-scale artisanal alluvial and minor hard-rock mining continues within the larger application area. Despite the fact that there was a mini alluvial gold-rush to the area in the 1990’s, the area largely remained unknown to the gold exploration industry within Tanzania.