TSX-listed Sama Resources has confirmed the presence of mineralisation at its Bounta zone in Côte d’Ivoire. Côte d’Ivoire – Over the last five months, Sama Resources has completed 4 064 m at three specific sites over a strike length of 25 km, drilling for nickel, copper and palladium. These sites are Samapleu, Bounta and Yepleu. This new discovery confirms Bounta as the third mineralised prospect out of more than 20 potential zones within Sama’s tenement as outlined by a 2013 airborne electromagnetic survey. The drilling results at the Bounta zone confirmed the presence of mineralisation at depth and warrant additional investigations. This new discovery confirms Bounta as the third mineralised prospect out of more than 20 potential zones within Sama’s tenement as outlined by a 2013 airborne electromagnetic survey. Read: Sama Resources all set for exploration in Côte d’Ivoire Exploration to be temporarily halted At the Bounta zone, one borehole was drilled aiming at a strong 11 000 Conductivity-Thickness (CT) electromagnetic (EM) target located 600 m from surface. The hole returned disseminated to semi-massive sulphide between 533 m to 540 m from surface with a small section of semi-massive sulphides. Additional geophysical work and more drilling are needed now to explain the source for the strong EM target. Several sample batches will be delivered to the assay laboratory in Canada when post-COVID-19 shipping becomes available. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the requirement for cash conservation measures to be implemented, Sama Resources will temporarily suspend exploration activities at the project in Côte d’Ivoire. Company president and CEO commented, “With assays pending on the new sulphide intersections at Bounta and Samapleu, along with a catalogue of new geophysical targets, we will resume work with even more meaningful and defined targets as soon as we are able.  I’m excited to now have three core prospects within this new nickel, copper and palladium district with additional airborne EM targets yet to be explored.”