TSX-listed African Gold Group has announced an accelerated construction development timeline for its fully licensed Kobada gold project in Southern Mali. According to African Gold Group the fast-tracked schedule reduces construction from 23 months to 19 months. This results in significant savings in EPCM costs and working capital. A detailed design has been completed on the majority of the process plant. In addition, initial infrastructure has been completed on main camp and construction camp. Lower power requirements has also resulted in smaller, short-lead time equipment for process plant. The Kobada project is a fully licensed and permitted advanced development project located in the Birimian Greenstone belt in Southern Mali. The company is working towards delivering the definitive feasibility study in Q2 2020 as a final step before commencing construction. Incorporating significant experience from other West African operations, SENET has assisted in designing the process plant for Kobada, which is very similar to other operating plants in the region. The mine is designed with ease of construction and operation as a priority. The simplified and compact process plant flowsheet minimises the requirement for expensive and long lead process equipment, thereby substantially reducing the construction time. Read: Government committed to mining in Mali Simple yet flexible design Danny Callow, COO of African Gold Group commented, “Utilising known technology to develop a robust plant flowsheet suitable for West African conditions, yet simple and flexible in design, has allowed us to fast-track the development of the engineering to a stage where much of the plant is now at detailed design level. This allows us to shorten the schedule significantly and save on engineering costs. This achievement is made even more remarkable by the fact that SENET engineers and designers have had to work remotely due to the current lockdown conditions in South Africa.” The company also intends to outsource key specialised components of the plant from best in class providers, including a state-of-the-art hybrid, solar PV, thermal and battery storage system, fuel storage and supply, and the mining and TSF contract to reduce upfront capital cost.