Mkango Resources has announced the donation of a new state of the art Mindray WATO EX-20 anaesthetic machine to the Mercy James Centre at the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital in Blantyre, Malawi. The new anaesthetic machine will help enable the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital to set up a new operating theatre for emergency operations, specifically for patients who are suspected of having the COVID 19 virus. Alexander Lemon, President of Mkango Resources states: “We are delighted to donate this anaesthetic machine to the Mercy James Centre at the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital to help fight the growing pandemic of COVID 19 in Malawi. “We hope that it will potentially help save many lives in the coming years. Mkango is committed to supporting the country in which it operates, as it moves towards the sustainable development of the Songwe Hill rare earths project in Malawi.” Professor Eric Borgstein, Consultant Pediatric Surgeon at the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital and Professor of Surgery at the University of Malawi College of Medicine, states: “Surgical emergencies cannot wait. While the hospital is struggling to respond to the new demands of the Coronavirus epidemic, the provision of care for patients with acute surgical conditions must go on! “It is gratifying to see Mkango Resources making such a timely donation, which will benefit all our various patients, not only now but for years to come. This new anaesthetic machine will enable us to set up a separate operating theatre for patients who may be COVID infected; thereby keeping the existing theatres free for the many daily surgical emergencies. “A great example of appropriate, effective and useful assistance to our hospital.” Dr Singatiya Stella Chikumbanje, Consultant Anaesthetist at Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital, states: “We are grateful for the donation of this anaesthetic machine. The arrival of the anaesthetic machine is very timely, as it will help in our provision of safe anaesthesia for our patients during the COVID period and beyond. “Hopefully, other companies will emulate Mkango’s generosity and allow us to provide improved care to all our patients.” Read more about COVID-19 The Mindray WATO EX-20 anaesthetic machine was purchased from Worldwide Pharmaceutical Distributors who are agents and distributors for Mindray in Malawi.