Mining businesses invest significantly in rock haulers, excavators, slurry pumps and other heavy equipment, and the fuel and maintenance costs for that machinery can pile up quickly while chipping away at the bottom line. Some African mining companies have discovered a way to drive operational and fuel savings while maximizing the performance and durability of their crucial equipment, and curtailing emissions, with Fuel Ox with Combustion Catalyst. Originally developed as a fuel additive for high intensity applications, including U.S. military operations, Fuel Ox is now available for commercial use. It offers benefits to many industries in addition to mining, including trucking, waste management, heavy construction and commercial and recreational marine use. Recent field tests of the product with three African mining companies showed substantial improvement in equipment performance and equipment. Fuex Ox is a multifunctional fuel additive with lubricity agents and detergents. Like other fuel additives, it stabilizes fuel, cleans vital engine components, protects against corrosion and removes water. But its proprietary, patented Combustion Catalyst also lowers the combustion point of fuel. This, in turn, maximizes the burn of diesel in the cylinder, improving fuel efficiency and performance while lowering soot and other exhaust emissions that harm both vital engine components and the environment. Cleaner burning engines substantially lower the need for diesel exhaust fluid, with many users reporting reductions of between 20% and 50%. Read more TECH NEWS Less soot in the exhaust means substantially fewer regenerations to clean out diesel particulate filters, reducing operator and equipment downtime. “Keeping your diesel equipment performing at its peak in rugged conditions and controlling fuel and maintenance costs are priorities for any mining and exploration company, and Fuel Ox can make a substantial impact on both of those lines,” says Rand Taylor, president of Fuel Ox LLC. “These field tests showed marked improvement in a few pieces of equipment. When you apply those efficiencies across an entire fleet, the fuel and maintenance cost savings and productivity improvements can be very substantial.”