Mining businesses invest significantly in rock haulers, excavators, slurry pumps and other heavy equipment, and the fuel and maintenance costs for that machinery can pile up quickly while chipping away at the bottom line. Some African mining companies have discovered a way to drive operational and fuel savings while maximizing the performance and durability of their crucial equipment, and curtailing emissions, with Fuel Ox with Combustion Catalyst. Originally developed as an additive for high intensity applications, including U.S. military operations, it is now available for commercial use. It offers benefits to many industries in addition to mining, including trucking, waste management, heavy construction and commercial and recreational marine use. Recent field tests of the product with three African mining companies showed substantial improvement in equipment performance and equipment. It is a multifunctional fuel additive with lubricity agents and detergents. Like other additives, it stabilizes fuel, cleans vital engine components, protects against corrosion and removes water. But its proprietary, patented Combustion Catalyst also lowers the combustion point. This, in turn, maximizes the burn of diesel in the cylinder, improving efficiency and performance while lowering soot and other exhaust emissions that harm both vital engine components and the environment. Cleaner burning engines substantially lower the need for diesel exhaust fluid, with many users reporting reductions of between 20% and 50%. Less soot in the exhaust means substantially fewer regenerations to clean out diesel particulate filters, reducing operator and equipment downtime. “Keeping your diesel equipment performing at its peak in rugged conditions and controlling fuel and maintenance costs are priorities for any mining and exploration company, and Fuel Ox can make a substantial impact on both of those lines,” said Rand Taylor, president of Fuel Ox LLC. “These field tests showed marked improvement in a few pieces of equipment. When you apply those efficiencies across an entire fleet, the fuel and maintenance cost savings and productivity improvements can be very substantial.” The product is highly concentrated, with 1 gallon treating up to 10,000 gallons. It is 100% soluble, can be used in all petroleum-based fuels and is available in a variety of sizes and seasonal/application-specific formulas. Companies interested in testing Fuel Ox in their fleets and heavy machinery may call Alec Taylor, director of operations, at (844) 8FUELOX for a consultation. To learn more about Fuel Ox, visit www.FuelOx.com and follow on: Facebook at facebook.com/FuelOx/ LinkedIn at linkedin.com/company/Fuel-Ox-LLC/ and Instagram at instagram.com/FuelOx/