SENET (Pty) Ltd. (SENET), a DRA Global Group Company (DRA), was founded in 1989 and operates from Johannesburg, South Africa. SENET has provided project management, detailed multi-disciplinary engineering, procurement, logistics management and construction services to the mining, mineral processing, infrastructure and materials handling industries. SENET’s extensive project and construction experience spans 3 decades and highly proficient for working remote areas across the African continent, as well as in the Middle East, Asia, and Central and South America. Read more about SENET SENET has successfully completed more than 500 projects and studies in Africa, executed more copper-cobalt solvent extraction (SX) and electrowinning (EW) plants on the African Copperbelt (spanning Central African regions between northern Zambia and the southern Democratic Republic of Congo); more than any other engineering firm on the continent. SENET employs over 300 people and considered one of the most experienced hydrometallurgical process engineering teams in Africa. SENET’s is firmly recognised for a well-established reputation in designing and completing medium to large projects on time, to specification and within budget. SENET EXPERTISE Minerals & Metals Processing SENET has designed and constructed numerous Mineral Beneficiation Projects offering expertise in processing base and precious metals, with a specific focus on copper, cobalt and gold. SENET’s capabilities include bulk commodities and materials handling, having undertaken projects and studies in potash, uranium, coal and iron ore. SENET’s engineering and management continuity provides clients with the best possible project schedule and process profitability. Heap Leach In the early 1990s, SENET developed a range of proprietary Heap Leach Stacking and Agglomeration equipment that has enjoyed global success. Today, SENET is considered a leader in Heap Leach Equipment Technology on the African continent and, in addition, provide engineering capability and construction tailored solutions for clients. Hydrometallurgy SENET currently boasts one of the largest hydrometallurgical process teams in Africa, with a deep knowledge base in SX/EW and concentrator plant designs. To-date, SENET has provided more than 18 copper/cobalt facilities on the African Copperbelt. Energy SENERGY is a wholly owned subsidiary of SENET, specialising in electrical energy solutions for clients. Each SENERGY power plant connects seamlessly to the existing electrical network without placing the electrical supply stability at risk. A SENERGY solar plant uses best-in-class components, designed for outstanding and sustainable performance with the social licence in mind. For more information click here