Demolition takes many forms, from removing an internal wall to the complete demolition and rehabilitation of a redundant mining site. A critical skill in the demolition industry is applying the appropriate method for the task at hand. When considering the demolition of a tall building, for example, top-down mechanical demolition and implosion are comparable, but are restricted by the environment in which the demolition is to take place. Read more TECH NEWS If there is sufficient space and time available, implosion might be the better option, whereas a very restricted or operational environment might result in high-reach demolition being more effective and better suited to the structure itself. Demolition is environmentally-unfriendly Jet Demolition are well-equipped and experienced to deliver environmentally-responsible, but also practical, projects for large industrial and mining sites. The company has previously demolished an extensive range of industrial, chemical, and mining plants, where a wide spectrum of toxic or hazardous materials were decontaminated, treated, neutralised, or disposed of. Read more about the environment Jet Demolition also offers asbestos abatement, which is often associated with the demolition of older structures. It is registered with the Department of Labour as an asbestos contractor and are certified to safely remove all types of asbestos in strict accordance with the relevant regulations and standards, such as the Asbestos Regulations 155 of 2002, Environmental Laws Amendment Act 14 of 2009 and the Waste Act 59 of 2008. An extensive range of environmental and regulatory requirements apply to demolition projects, in addition to specific client requirements. Jet Demolition is accredited in terms of the following safety, health, environmental and quality standards: CMB253 NOSA Integrated HSE System, NOSA NOSCAR Safety Performance Level, ISO 45001:2018 Occupational Health & Safety Management System and ISO 9001:2015 Quality Management System. Any contractor can tear down a building It is not uncommon for a building contractor to also undertake demolition work. However, it is up to clients to determine whether the demolition service provider is bona fide and has the appropriate tools, equipment and skill to be able to undertake large-scale demolition projects. Fortunately, the company sees a change in the industry whereby due diligence audits and assessments are being undertaken prior to contracts being awarded. This is encouraging as it will result in a stronger and more accountable industry. Anyone can become a demolition expert Personnel undertake regular training and certification in their areas of experience, but the true strength of the company lies in the skills of its personnel. In South Africa, it is not unusual to be tasked with the demolition of a structure for which as-built drawings and records do not even exist. Upfront planning and preparation for such structures involves intensive analysis and in-depth examination. This often means reverse-engineering structural assessments derived from the initial investigation to best assess the primary characteristics and stability of such structures. The information is then used to verify whether the anticipated methods are appropriate, and to anticipate the structure’s response. While modelling software is available internationally that is capable of determining to some degree how a structure will react, it is very much dependent on fully detailed as-built information, which isn’t readily available. Instead, Jet Demolition relies on its own extensive experience with similar works and the application of very conservative safety factors. Demolition is dangerous In demolition, the majority of projects work from the most dangerous or difficult point of a structure towards a point of safety on the ground. Therefore Jet Demolition has adopted a non-negotiable approach to safety. Jet Demolition’s business, its reputation, and its industry is based on engineering methods focused on the safety of persons. Over the past 28 years, the company has developed a comprehensive Integrated Safety Management Programme, which has resulted in the highest level of safety performance in the industry. In its annual 2019 NOSA audit, Jet Demolition scored 98.14%, one of the highest achievements internationally in the commercial construction industry.