Implats notes the withdrawal of all criminal charges brought against Implats subsidiary, Impala Platinum Limited, on 17 April 2020 by the state. The withdrawn charges related to alleged contraventions, by its Impala Rustenburg division, of certain regulations of the Disaster Management Act 57 of 2020. Commenting on the withdrawal, Implats CEO, Nico Muller says: “Implats welcomes this development and continues to prioritise efforts by our management team, in close collaboration with government, to protect the health and wellbeing of all stakeholders. Read more about PGMs “Mark Munroe, our CE of Impala Rustenburg and Dr Jon Andrews, our Group Executive: Health, Safety and Environment have done a remarkable job in shaping efforts to manage the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on our operation and the broader mining industry. “I wholeheartedly commend the leadership team, including the General Managers of our mining and processing operations, for their unfailing support of all relevant government regulations in prioritising the health and safety of our employees and host communities.” Implats took several proactive steps to safeguard its business through the challenges and volatility associated with Covid-19, with a key focus on saving the lives and preserving the livelihoods of our employees, contractors and host communities. The management team maintains regular and open communication with all key stakeholders, including employees, organised labour and relevant government agencies. The critical and supportive role of the South African Police Service (SAPS) in this regard is greatly appreciated and remains invaluable in prioritising lives and livelihoods. The Group will continue to focus on sustaining operating activities, with the necessary precautionary measures in place, to secure the vital role Implats plays in our host communities and the national economies where it operates. Read more about COVID-19 The Group has, to date, and continues to undertake operations in a legally compliant and responsible way. Implats has supported the decisive action taken by the South African government and SAPS to contain the Covid-19 infection rate and remains committed to contributing, where it can, to South Africa’s socio-economic stability. Apart from the Group’s regular commitments in terms of its social and labour plans, Implats has also thrown its full weight into supporting its communities in the face of the global Covid-19 pandemic, committing substantial financial, planning and logistical support to various initiatives surrounding its operations. All operations in the countries in which it operates have stepped up their social contributions in this regard during this difficult time. Implats’ view is that despite recent improvements in the coronavirus infection rate, the near-term operating environment will remain challenging and will require continued focus and vigilance in order mitigate ongoing risks posed by the coronavirus. The benefit of experience gained by our team over the past few months will prove vital to successfully navigating the expected variability in the operating environment. Several innovative solutions were developed by our management teams aimed at enabling the best possible precautionary measures against the spread of Covid-19 among its employees, including different cycles of work, staggered shift systems and altered work practises in order to advance social distancing. Group Executive: HSE, Dr Jon Andrews says: “The safety of employees, contractors and host communities at all sites is a key priority for Implats. Global best practise measures continue to be advanced in order to protect the health of our employees during the various lockdown levels and thereafter. “These include an enhanced focus on pandemic awareness, heightened risk mitigation measures appropriate for each stage of the pandemic, medical surveillance and early Covid-19 detection, workplace and home hygiene, additional medical supplies and medical protective equipment, and the isolation and early treatment of confirmed Covid-19 cases.” Read more about Implats