Thor Explorations has announced that concrete has been poured on the Segilola process plant site, construction and procurement are progressing on schedule and on budget with first gold pour expected in Q2 2021. Segun Lawson, President & CEO, states: “Our construction team and EPC contractor, Norinco International Cooperation, are continuing to deliver on our targets in a challenging operating environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Read more about gold I cannot speak highly enough of the professionalism being displayed day in and day out by our workforce and contractors.” Construction update The first concrete has been poured by Norinco International, the LSTK EPC Contractor, for the foundations for the gold plant at Segilola and the CIP tank foundation pouring is in process. The Water Storage Facility has been constructed to final height and the spillway construction is progressing. The facility is filling well and is expected to reach full capacity before the end of the year. Construction at the main camp is continuing with the main buildings at roof level. Handover of the administration, technical services, dining facilities, clinic and recreational facilities is expected in Q4 2020. Procurement is 60% complete, with vendors re-confirming delivery times. The first shipment of materials recently arriving at Lagos port. Long lead items are scheduled to arrive on site in Q4 2020 and Q1 2021. Local employment is a key aspect of the Company’s development approach and during this initial period over 360 jobs have been created, with 92% being Nigerian nationals and approximately 56% being from the local communities. The Company has a strong and proactive approach to health and safety and to date the Project completed over 220,000 man hours with no lost time injuries. COVID-19 As the COVID-19 (Coronavirus) pandemic continues to have a global effect, the health and safety of our employees, communities and contractors are our utmost priority. Read more about COVID-19 The Company is taking steps and precautions to address the effects of the pandemic responsibly and to limit potential exposure to the rapidly changing situation. Measures have been put in place to monitor and mitigate against the spread of COVID -19 which includes testing, monitoring, and all-round practices of cleanliness and washing to ensure any instances of COVID-19 are instantly monitored and identified. A handbook has been provided for all personnel and both HSE teams from Thor Explorations and Norinco continue to report on this on a daily basis following constant monitoring. All government and regulatory rules are also adhered to. Exploration Both the contracted RC and diamond rigs have arrived on site and exploration drilling has commenced in parallel with construction. Both rigs will be running concurrently and will be targeting the down dip extension of the Segilola Deposit and satellite targets identified within the licence. The first drilling results are expected in mid-September.