Jubilee Metals Group has entered into a third-party ROM chrome ore offtake agreement that fully commits its Windsor chrome beneficiation plant for the next three years, with an option for this to be extended further. Under the terms of the Offtake Agreement, Jubilee commits to the production of 40 000 tonnes per month of chrome concentrate or, subject to the chrome content in the ROM, saleable chrome concentrate, while also retaining the rights to all discard material including the contained PGMs. Read more about platinum group metals In addition, Jubilee has also successfully entered into a joint venture agreement (“JV Agreement”) with a privately held South African company (JV Partner) to secure the rights to a further 35 000 tonnes per month chrome processing capacity. Under the JV Agreement Jubilee will assume operational control of the Windsor 8 facility while also committing to upgrade it by incorporating Jubilee’s processing solutions. Leon Coetzer, CEO of Jubilee, comments: “Jubilee continues to aggressively drive its expansion across both its South African and Zambian operations. Our significant progress in Zambia is followed by the successful implementation of these two key agreements supporting the expansion of our South African chrome and PGM operations. These agreements have been secured on the back of Jubilee’s track record of continuously driving to set new industry standards. Read more about mining in southern Africa “The Offtake Agreement, which supports Windsor’s capacity to produce 40 000 tonnes per month of chrome concentrate, secures not only a constant feed source for Windsor under a protected operational margin, but also significantly increases Jubilee’s surface PGM resources from the discard of the chrome operations. “The successful completion of the Offtake Agreement is credit to the Jubilee team’s ability to consistently achieve exceptional chrome recovery efficiencies well above the norm in the industry. “With Windsor fully committed to working at full capacity, Jubilee has also successfully secured Windsor 8 under a JV Agreement, being the rights to a further 35 000 tonnes per month of chrome processing capacity. “The new Facility and JV partner were carefully selected to establish a presence in a strategic location which will provide Jubilee with further opportunities to increase our chrome ore supply.” Highlights Read more about Jubilee Metals Group