Nigeria Mining Week hosts key webinar in run-up to digital event Nigeria’s Minister of Mines and Steel Development, Arc. Olamilekan Adegbite, and the Executive Governor of Nassarawa State, Engr. Abdullahi A. Sule, are part of an expert webinar this coming Thursday, 20 August at 13h00 GMT, which will focus on: “Driving investment in the Nigerian mining industry in a pandemic situation” Joining them on the panel is well-known mining consultant, Emma K Priestley, Executive Director at Goldstone Resources Ltd in the UK. Webinar series in run-up to Nigeria Mining Week The webinar is part of a series of expert live discussions hosted by Nigeria Mining Week in partnership with Mining Review Africa in the run-up to the event in October. The organisers of Nigeria Mining Week recently announced that the event would proceed as a digital platform from 12-16 October this year while the event will reconvene as a live event in Abuja on 11-13 October 2021. “No country in Africa has been left untouched by COVID-19, including Nigeria,” says Sabrina Tab, Nigeria Mining Week’s event manager. “In August the country had reported upwards of 40 000 positive cases. This has created an unprecedented period of uncertainty for the country, which has seen federal and state governments put in place several processes to mitigate the spread of the virus and showcase the nation’s leading response to dealing with the pandemic.” She adds: ”Regardless of the challenges that may lie ahead, the Nigerian mining industry offers considerable financial gains. It is home to abundant, untapped mineral reserves, and the government is focused on increasing the country’s business investment attraction to exploit these. With a growth strategy in place and in play, the mining sector is poised for short and mid-term growth as investors move to capitalise on opportunities in iron ore, gold, zinc and lead, amongst others.” hursday’s webinar will be moderated by Laura Cornish, the Head of Content at Mining Review Africa. Registered audience members will be able to pose questions to the expert panel. To be part of this discussion, registrations are free and can be done here: click here. Nigeria Mining Week is organised in association with Clarion Events Africa, a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Other well-known events by Clarion Events Africa include Africa Mining Forum, DRC Mining Week, African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa, Future Energy East Africa and Future Energy Nigeria. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group. Nigeria Mining Week dates and location:Webinar series (online): 20 August & 17 September 2020Digital Nigeria Mining Week keynote opening session: 12 October 2020Digital conference: 12-16 October 2020Online networking sessions: 12-16 October 2020 Live conference and exhibition: 11-13 October 2021Live location: International Convention Centre, Abuja, Nigeria Website: https://www.nigeriaminingweek.com/Twitter:  https://twitter.com/NigeriaMWFacebook:  https://www.facebook.com/Nigeriaminingweek/LinkedIN: https://www.linkedin.com/company/nigeria-mining-week/ Media contact:Senior communications manager: Annemarie RoodbolOffice: +27 21 700 3558Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com