Despite disruptions to many industries due to lockdown restrictions in place in South Africa over previous months, COENG is on track to complete its 2 x 40 MVA plant substations at platinum miner Wesizwe Platinum’s Bakubung mine, in South Africa. Based in Midrand, Johannesburg, COENG is an engineering procurement and construction (EPC) firm with a strong track record for delivering on time and to specification for projects across a multitude of industries. Read more about PGMs The new substation will provide the required power for the new concentrator plant that will be rolled out in two phases. Phase 1, which was also awarded to COENG, started in June 2019 and is currently under construction. It will equip the concentrator with the power to produce one-million tonnes a year. Phase 2 is aimed at ensuring the mine has the required power for an additional two-million tonnes a year. “Phase 2 is on track for completion in March 2021. While the pandemic has delayed progress on construction projects country-wide, this particular project was still in the design phase when sites were closed. “COENG’s scope of work for phase 2 of this project entails the deployment of a full multidisciplinary team, ranging from electrical power system design analysis to geotechnical, civil and structural designs. It also includes procurement support, construction monitoring and commissioning until the final handover. “Provided that the lockdown regulations allow for construction to start in early September as we have planned, we do not expect project timelines to be affected,” says Casian Dendere, COENG CEO. Supportive systems key in meeting objectives “The COENG team has been using advanced cloud technology for remote working for some time now, so it was a smooth transition for our design team to continue working on this project from the safety of their homes,” explains Dendere. “The company makes use of virtualised desktop infrastructure technology to ensure the team always has access to the resources they need. This has enabled them to continue their professional services contracts with clients across industries such as chemicals, mining, commercial and utilities. “In addition, COENG makes use of an Integrated Management System (IMS) which aligns the quality management, health and safety management, and environmental management of all projects. “We have successfully achieved the re-certification process of our IMS following an audit completed in December 2019. “This was made possible by Quality System Manager, Tumi Hamore; Health & Safety Manager, Charity Tagwireyi; and Environmental Manager, Samukelo Mntambo, all under the sponsorship of Systems and Governance Director, Welsh Dlamini. “With our strong and supportive team at COENG, we continue to strive for excellence under any circumstances,” concludes Dendere.