IronRidge Resources has been accepted as a member of the European Battery Alliance (EBA250); an organisation committed to driving a competitive and sustainable battery industry in Europe by 2025. Commenting, Thore Sekkenes, EBA250 Programme Director, says: “In welcoming IronRidge to the EBA250 club, we recognise the potential and emerging importance of the west African region as a stable supply of raw materials for the European battery industry.” Commenting, Vincent Mascolo, CEO of IronRidge, says: “We are delighted to be accepted as a member of EBA250; a battery industry focussed network which will broaden our market exposure at a time when Europe is emerging as the next epicentre for the EV and stored energy sectors. Read more about battery metals “With compelling benefits such as access to regulatory insights, business development opportunities and market intelligence, EBA250 membership will be highly valuable to the Company as we continue to progress our Cape Coast Lithium Portfolio. “We are confident in our project fundamentals, and the project’s proximity to Europe is highly advantageous and may deliver multiple pathways through the value-adding vertical integration ambitions of the EU. “We therefore look forward to a long and mutually beneficial relationship with the EBA250, and the contribution that IronRidge can make to the industry.” Highlights: Membership provides IronRidge with a unique insight into the ongoing activities of the rapidly developing EU battery sector including: The EBA was launched in October 2017 by European Commission Vice President Maroš Šefčovič. Its purpose is to ensure that all Europeans benefit from safer traffic, cleaner vehicles, and more sustainable technological solutions. This will be achieved by creating a competitive and sustainable battery cell manufacturing value chain in Europe. The economic upside is clear: the market will have an estimated annual value of up to €250 billion by 2025. By combining European cutting-edge competences, financial strength and a cross-industrial approach, a competitive and sustainable production capacity is clearly within reach. Further insight into the EBA250 can be found here.