Castillo Copper has announced that its entire issued share capital of 1,009,938,722 ordinary shares has been admitted to the standard segment of the Official List of the Financial Conduct Authority and to trading on the main market for listed securities of the London Stock Exchange plc under the TIDM “CCZ”. The Company’s ISIN is AU000000CCZ2. The Placing was arranged by SI Capital Limited. Details of Admission and Placing The Company has raised gross cash proceeds of £1,345,000 via the placing of 79,117,618 new Ordinary Shares (“Placing Shares”) at a price of 1.7 pence each, capitalising Castillo at £17.16 million. Read more about base metals The 1,009,938,722 ordinary shares admitted to the standard segment of the Official List of the Financial Conduct Authority and to trading on the main market for listed securities of the London Stock Exchange plc to comprise 929,056,398 Existing Ordinary Shares, 79,117,618 Placing Shares and 1,764,706 Ordinary Shares issued to SI Capital Limited in connection with the Placing. The Placing Shares will rank pari passu with existing Ordinary Shares. Capitalised terms used in this announcement are as defined in the prospectus published by the Company on 27 July 2020, unless the context otherwise requires. Key Projects The Company’s strategy focuses on resource exploration projects that have the potential, through the application of disciplined and structured exploration and analysis, to be progressed towards the development of a mining operation. The dual listing will support the Company’s aim to transform the business into a mid-tier copper producer. The three main projects across Australia and Zambia include: Cangai Project Mt Oxide Project Zed Projects Use of Proceeds Simon Paull, Managing Director of Castillo Copper, said: “We are delighted to have completed our dual listing on the London Stock Exchange, a milestone for the Company and one that will help us drive the business forward towards our goal to become a mid-tier copper producer. “The London listing significantly enhances the Company’s profile and gives us access to UK institutional investors that understand the global copper industry dynamics and are prepared to fund highly prospective projects. “We welcome our new shareholders and look forward to updating them and the wider market during this exciting period of development for Castillo Copper.”