Zest WEG is leveraging its range of capabilities and local manufacturing facilities to supply a complete low-voltage substation to Sasol’s Prillan plant in Sasolburg. The custom-designed solution includes a double-storey E-house, transformers, variable speed drive (VSD) panels and distribution boards, according to Lukas Barnard, oil and gas specialist in Zest WEG’s business development team. The specialised E-house has a number of fit-for-purpose features. Read more TECH NEWS “The outside wall is manufactured using 306 stainless steel sheets to deal with the highly corrosive environment,” Barnard says. “The E-house is designed with a secondary pitch roof and will have a two-hour fire rating on the structural integrity of the building. It is equipped with a complete heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) system.” To suit the available footprint at the plant, the E-house comprises two buildings. The first structure – measuring 20 metres by 8,5 metres – is elevated to a height of three metres above ground level. Adjacent to it is the second structure, a double-storey design with 7 metres by 4,2 metres of floorspace. The two will be attached using platforms and staircases. Drawing on the capability of Zest WEG’s local manufacturing facilities, the E-house includes various VSD panels, distribution boards and free-standing panels. There are also four 1,6 MVA oil-type distribution transformers produced at the company’s transformer manufacturing facility in Wadeville. “After all the equipment is installed in the E-house, full functional testing will be carried out at Zest WEG’s Heidelberg facility,” Barnard says. “The building was designed to split into four sections for transport purposes. These four sections, with all the installed equipment, will weigh close to 160 tonnes, and will be rigged into place on site with a 500 tonne mobile crane.” Barnard says that Zest WEG worked in close collaboration with Proconics on the project. “Proconics is applying its expertise in electrical engineering, design and site installation, as well as electric and instrumentation interfacing and civil engineering works,” he says. “This is particularly important as the project involves a live changeover between the old and new substation; the substation also interfaces with an ongoing process.” Barnard highlights this kind of collaborative synergy as the basis for providing the client with the best possible solution – ensuring optimal performance and reliability.