With difficult economic conditions only getting worse during the Covid-19 pandemic, pump users need to make the most of their operational inventory, even pumps that may be considered redundant. Pump expert Lee Vine, managing director of specialist companies Integrated Pump Technology and Integrated Pump Rental, says all industries can benefit from improved pump efficiencies. Read more TECH NEWS “In our daily contact with pump users, we ensure not only that the pumps we sell, and rent are looked after,” Vine says. “We also repair and refurbish other brands that customers have on their work sites.” Their depth of technical capability is based on combined experience within the companies of some six decades in the pump business. While Integrated Pump Technology specialises in Grindex and Faggiolati slurry pumps and Leyboldt vacuum pumps, the Integrated Pump Rental business focuses on its locally produced SlurrySucker dredging system, Sykes diesel driven pump sets and the Grindex submersible range. “To support our product ranges – and keep our own rental fleet in optimal condition – we invest continuously in our quality-accredited workshop facilities,” Vine says. “This includes extensive testing capability, with a test tank that can accommodate motors up to 150 kW in power.” Workshop manager Fred Slabbert, a master electrician and millwright, highlights the value of optimising assets to cost effectively promote operational efficiency. “With our experience of various pump brands, we make sure that all work is done to original equipment manufacturer (OEM) standards,” he says. “This gives customers peace of mind, and allows us to give a six-month warranty on repairs and refurbishment.” Slabbert says pump reliability is now more important than ever, as mining and industrial operations must optimise uptime to remain profitable in these challenging economic times. “We conduct professional assessments on any pumping equipment – even redundant units – for customers,” he says. “On the basis of a detailed condition report from us, along with a competitive quotation, companies can assess the refurbishment option – which usually makes good business sense all round.”