Anglo American Platinum, or Amplats, has declared force majeure to customers, suppliers of third-party purchase of concentrate and suppliers of tolling material following the temporary shutdown of the entire Anglo Converter Plant at the Waterval smelter in Rustenburg. The company’s Anglo Converter Plant (ACP) phase A converter plant was damaged following an explosion within the converter on 10 February 2020. Nobody was injured in the incident and work has started to repair phase A, which is expected to be completed by Q2 2021. READ MORE: Natascha Viljoen to succeed Griffith as Amplats CEO As per normal business procedure, the phase B
unit was commissioned to take over from the phase A plant and was in the
process of ramping up to steady state, when water was detected in the furnace. Notwithstanding extensive testing being conducted
to determine the source of the water, and a number of circuits being isolated,
water continued to be observed in the furnace. This posed a high risk of
explosion and Amplats determined that it had no other option but to temporarily
shut down the phase B unit, to ensure the safety of all employees, and avoid a
catastrophic event. It is anticipated that the repair works to fix
the phase B unit will take approximately 80 days. As
a result of the temporary closure of the entire ACP, Amplats has had to declare
force majeure as it is unable to complete the processing of material during the
converter repair. While
production from own mines will continue, the concentrate from the mines will
continue to be smelted at one of the company’s four smelter complexes. However,
production from own mines, as well as third party material will not be able to
be converted to refined production while the ACP is undergoing repairs. Sibanye-Stillwater to process its own material One of Amplats’ customers, PGM mining
company Sibanye-Stillwater,
has received written notification of force majeure regarding the toll agreement
between Amplats and Sibanye-Stillwater’s Rustenburg operation and the Purchase
of Concentrate (PoC) agreement with Sibanye-Stillwater’s Kroondal and Platinum
mile operations. Sibanye-Stillwater’s Marikana and US-based PGM operations are not
affected and will benefit from the commensurate short-term commodity price
increases due to the Amplats supply disruption. Amplats has indicated that its converter plant will be unavailable
for at least eight weeks, during which period the force majeure would remain in
effect and it would be unable to fully process the Rustenburg, Kroondal and
Platinum mile concentrate. Sibanye-Stillwater says that it has significant spare PGM processing capacity at the Marikana operations and at the Precious Metal Refinery in Brakpan and will be assessing how best to utilise this capacity.