The reforms introduced by the Angolan government through the new Diamond Trading Policy has brought about positive results in both gross revenue and tax revenue. The
reforms that were made to the legal framework of the diamond trading system included
the implementation of the new Diamond Trading Policy, approved by Presidential
Decree nº175 / 18, of 18 July 18  2018. According to Angola’s national diamond trading company SODIAM EP, the new Diamond Trading Policy has had an exponential growth effect in tax revenues from the sale of diamonds, as well as brought about competition and transparency to the sector, which did not exist until then. READ MORE: Angola could become world’s #1 diamond producer Moreover,
the diamond marketing model in force from 2012 to 2016, was based on the system
of the so-called preferential customer and on a pre-authorized and pre-ordered
direct sale procedure. In effect, under the terms of the legislation then in force,
the previous Head of the State, in each year, approved by dispatch, both the
list of companies with the status of preferential customer and the percentage
of production that these customers could buy. These
preferential customers enjoyed the right of exclusive access to the market, being
the only ones who could buy diamonds from SODIAM. In addition to this exclusive
access privilege, preferred customers additionally enjoyed the right to buy at
preferential prices, with a discount, on the market value of the diamonds they purchased. Between 2012 and 2017, eight companies operated exclusively in Angola, under the status of preferential customer, and from 2013 to 2017, the companies IAXHON, RELACTANT and ODYSSEY, together, acquired more than 50% of the diamond production. Having noted that this model was significantly damaging to public finances, the current Angolan government approved in 2018, through Presidential Decree No. 175/18 of 27 July, a new Diamond Trading Policy, which did away with the preferred customers model and implemented new ways of selling diamonds. These new diamond sales models adopted under the new Diamond Trading Policy comprise the systems of sale by contracts (sights), auctions/tenders and spot. READ MORE: Diamond sector transformation in Angola approaches major milestone achievement Meanwhile, the client application process has become dynamic and transparent, with the implementation of an online platform at www.sodiamsales.com that allows the registration of customers directly. The
validation of applications takes place after a due diligence process is carried
out in accordance with international compliance standards, to ensure that due
checks of international requirements in terms of financial standing are made,
and to prevent unlawful acts of money laundering and financing terrorism. The
negotiation process currently takes place as follows: a)
The base sales reference price is previously defined, by agreement of the main players
in the process: Producer, SODIAM and independent evaluator; b)
The purchase of production by the customer is only effective if its offer is
equal to or higher than the base sales reference price. As
a result of the implementation of this set of measures, the diamond trading
system saw several improvements and positive aspects, namely: In
addition to the contracts under the 60% sales quota on the responsibility of mining
companies, in May 2019, 12 purchase and sale contracts were signed – including
four polishing factories - with the validity of 2 years, which will remain in
force until the end of the first half of 2021. On
August 13, 2019, the process of admitting new contractual customers was closed,
until the contracts currently in force have ended. Presidential Decree No. 175/18, of 27 July, provides that the current Diamond Trading Policy is submitted to an evaluation period after one year of its implementation, and its results must be evaluated and presented within a period of 180 days. Depending on the results obtained, some adjustments may be necessary to accommodate the emergence of the future Diamond Bourse, according to SODIAM EP.