Glencore would like to provide an update relating to the impact of COVID-19 on its operations: Various governments have imposed far-reaching restrictions to daily life and economic activity, and we have been engaging with the relevant authorities, unions and other stakeholders to understand the impact of these measures on our operations. We have introduced a number of precautionary measures across our offices and industrial assets in response to COVID-19. This includes the implementation of enhanced hygiene and cleaning measures, application of social distancing and identification of higher risk groups. Our goal is to operate only when we can keep our people safe and healthy, while safeguarding jobs and providing support to our local communities. To date, our larger operations have not been materially impacted, however a number of our smaller assets have had to restrict or stop operations. Canada The government of Quebec has ordered all non-essential businesses to close in an attempt to slow the spread of COVID-19. Accordingly, our Raglan (nickel) and Matagami (zinc) operations in Quebec will be on care and maintenance for the next three weeks. In Ontario, the government has issued a similar decree, but mining has been designated an essential business and therefore our assets can continue to operate. Chad Due to the disruptions to international mobility, transportation and supply chains, Glencore’s wholly-owned subsidiary, PetroChad (Mangara) (“PCM”) has taken steps to commence ceasing production at its Badila and Mangara oil fields. The facilities at the fields will be secured and remain on care and maintenance while PCM monitors the situation. The transition to care and maintenance is expected to complete towards the end of April. Colombia In Colombia, the President imposed a 19-day quarantine for the country from 25 March. Although the Presidential decree has exempted mining, growing community tensions and restrictions on logistics have made it very difficult to ensure the continued and safe operation of Prodeco (coal) and the security of its host communities. Accordingly, Prodeco has transitioned to care and maintenance. The port will continue to operate. South Africa The South African government has announced a nationwide lockdown for 21 days from 26 March. We have been engaging with the authorities to understand the impact of the lock-down on our operations. In accordance with the guidance received from the authorities: Supporting our workforce and local communities The health and wellbeing of our people, their families and the broader community remains our number one priority. For all our offices and industrial assets that are continuing to operate, we have implemented various additional precautionary measures to protect our employees. We recognise the uncertainty caused by the current environment and endeavour to support our workforce and local communities, as appropriate. The situation is evolving rapidly and we will continue to provide updates as appropriate. We thank our employees, contractors, customers, suppliers, communities and other stakeholders for their support during this challenging time. Glencore is committed to working with all its stakeholders in helping overcome the unprecedented challenges presented by this pandemic.