Like most asset classes, gold is being affected by the unprecedented economic and financial market conditions in play around the globe. Report from the World Gold Council We believe that recent volatility in the
gold price has been driven by massive liquidations across all assets, and
likely magnified by leveraged positions and rule-based trading. Gold has also likely been used to raise
cash to cover losses in other asset classes because: Thus far, selling appears more
concentrated on derivatives in exchanges and over the counter. While gold-backed ETFs have experienced
outflows in recent days, flows remain positive for the year. Funds across
regions have seen US$3.6 billion of net inflows in March, giving a collective
total of US$11.5 billion y-t-d. Looking ahead, we believe the
deceleration in economic growth will undoubtedly impact gold consumer demand
and gold’s volatility may remain high, but high risk levels combined with
widespread negative real rates and quantitative easing will be supportive of
gold investment demand as a safe haven. Unusual times, uncertain outcomes Perspectives on impending recessions
often diverge. Some see similarities to prior crises while others focus on new
signals and concerns. At this juncture, conditions in the
current environment – widespread travel restrictions, complete shutdown of
numerous sectors, and higher volatility in financial markets than during the
2008-2009 financial crisis – are unprecedented to many people across
generations. The chances of avoiding a global
recession appear low and investors are bracing themselves for more bumps ahead.
If a recession does occur, its depth and duration will depend on how quickly
and effectively governments are able to slow down the contagion, buffer their
economies and, hopefully, find ways of treating or preventing COVID-19. In our continuing engagement with
investors two questions recur: Why did the gold price drop alongside
stocks? The answer is linked to several factors.
The most prominent of these is the massive liquidation virtually all asset
classes experienced in the past week. And gold was no exception. Even
longer-term US treasuries prices fell, despite a second unscheduled cut by the
Fed on 15 March slashing the Fed funds rate to pre-2016 levels. The 10-year US treasury yield is trading
above 1% after reaching a historical low of 0.33% on 9 March. As a high quality, liquid asset gold may
also have been used to raise cash, especially since it was – until recently –
one of the few assets with positive returns this year. Gold was up 10% as of 9
March, more than any other major asset classes. There is historical precedent for these
types of pullbacks in gold. The correlation between gold and stocks generally
turns negative as stock prices tumble. However, there seems to be an exception
during periods of disorderly selling when volatility spikes to extreme levels.
For example, during the 2008-2009 financial crisis, as the VIX reached record
highs gold came under pressure. Finally, selling appears more
concentrated on derivatives in exchanges. Net long positioning in COMEX futures
– usually linked to speculative trading – was very high prior to gold’s
pullback. Some investors holding these positions,
which can be highly leveraged, may have been forced to sell to meet margin
requirements as the price fell through various technical levels. Is gold still an effective portfolio
hedge given its volatility? We believe that, so far, gold has played
an important role in portfolios as a source of liquidity and collateral. And we
expect it will serve as a haven in the longer term. Gold experienced pullbacks at the onset
of the global financial crisis too, falling between 15% and 25% in US-dollar
terms a couple of times during 2008. But by the end of that year, gold was one
of the few assets – alongside US treasuries – to post positive returns. It is also important to note that, while
the gold price is usually quoted in US dollars, its impact on portfolio
performance is measured in the local currency of an investor. To date, as stock indices around the
world have fallen sharply, gold’s performance has been positive in various
currencies, including the pound sterling, euro, and Indian rupee. And it has only been flat to slightly
negative in renminbi, US dollar and Japanese yen. Investors seem to agree. Despite the
price pullback and selling in most gold-backed ETFs listed in the US and Europe
this week, global inflows remain positive. Asia even saw inflows this week. And investors have added US$3.6 billion
to gold-backed ETFs in March and a total of US$11.5 billion y-t-d. What to expect next Gold’s performance is intertwined with
its unique nature as a consumer good and investment asset. And it is linked to
the interaction of four key drivers: So far this year, more than 30 central
banks have cut rates and many have implemented additional quantitative easing
measures. Governments around the globe are
pledging trillions of US dollars to support their citizens and their economies.
But ballooning budget deficits, negative real rates and debasement of
currencies will present structural challenges to asset managers, pension funds
and personal savings. It may take a while for financial
markets to stabilise. Amidst high volatility, the gold price may experience
additional swings, but the long-term implications of an environment combining
high risk and lower opportunity cost should support gold investment demand. We also expect central banks to remain
net gold buyers overall, albeit likely not at the same rate as in the past two
years. On the other hand, consumer demand may
soften significantly. Early figures by the National Bureau of Statistics in
China suggest a 40% contraction in purchases of gold, silver and gem jewellery
during the first two months of the year, and the new travel and movement
restrictions will undoubtedly affect other regions. Historically, however, investment flows
in periods of uncertainty tend to offset weakness in consumer markets.