Pan African Resources has implemented the necessary measures at all its operations to conduct essential services during the 21-day lockdown period in South Africa. The Group surface operations are currently operating at approximately 70% of normal capacity. Barberton Mines will, in the next few days, endeavour to resume limited operations at certain high-grade sections of its Fairview operation to ensure the required minimum feed for its BIOX processing plant. Essential
services specific to affected Pan African Resources’ operations include
security services, pumping and ventilation activities, metallurgical plant
maintenance, inspection of underground workings, management and monitoring of
tailings deposition facilities, waste management and water treatment facilities
and other health and safety related services. As part of essential services, the Group is also currently conducting limited surface re-mining and processing activities at its Elikhulu Tailings Retreatment Plant and at its Barberton Tailings Retreatment Plant. Read more about Elikhulu Tailings Retreatment Plant Cobus
Loots, CEO of Pan African Resources, comments: “In this time of crisis, we
are heartened by the manner in which all stakeholders in the mining industry
are collaborating. Pan
African Resources recognises that the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic
will be severe and far reaching. The impact will be even more pronounced in
areas with limited resources and poverty. “Recognising the economic and social hardship that communities and employees will experience during the National Lockdown, the Company will embark on support programmes, in addition to our existing initiatives, to alleviate this hardship.” Pan
African Resources supports and is committed to all government efforts to
contain the spread of COVID-19. Of the Group’s total staff and contractor
complement, only 20% (excluding security staff) are involved in the essential
services detailed above. Employees and contractors not required for essential services will remain at home for the duration of the National Lockdown. Read more about gold Further
measures to reduce the risk of COVID-19 contamination of essential service
personnel include the following: The
South African Department of Mineral Resources and Energy has approved the
Group’s planned activities during the National Lockdown, subject to compliance
with and adherence to all relevant Regulations and applicable legislation. The
COVID-19 pandemic is expected to have a severe adverse economic and social
impact on stakeholders involved in the Group’s operations. The
Group will, in the coming weeks, embark upon initiatives to assist stakeholders
in this regard in the areas in which it operates. Updated
guidance for the 2020 financial year will be communicated to shareholders after
the National Lockdown has concluded, once the Group is in a position to
quantify the extent and duration of the operational disruptions during this
time. Pan African Resources recognises that the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will be severe and far reaching. The impact will be even more pronounced in areas with limited resources and poverty. Read more about COVID-19