Endeavour Mining Corporation and SEMAFO have entered a definitive agreement whereby Endeavour will acquire all the issued and outstanding securities of SEMAFO by way of a Plan of Arrangement under the Business Corporations Act. The Transaction will create a top 15 global gold producer
and the largest in West Africa with six operations and an attractive growth
pipeline. Michael Beckett, Chairman of Endeavour, states: “This combination will create one of the leading gold
companies, with the largest portfolio of operating assets located entirely in
West Africa. In addition to being immediately accretive on all key metrics,
this transaction will enhance our scale as well as providing improved trading
liquidity, greater asset diversification and a reduced risk profile for all
shareholders. We will also continue to benefit from having La Mancha as a cornerstone shareholder, who will invest $100 million into to the combined entity and hold a 25 per cent interest on a pro forma basis.” Read more about gold Sébastien de Montessus, President & CEO of Endeavour, says: “This combination offers a rare opportunity to bring
together two leading West African mine operators with a shared strategic
vision, complementary assets, and management teams with a proven track record.
We believe this transaction represents a compelling value equation for both
sets of shareholders with the potential for a meaningful re-rating, whilst
providing increased asset diversification and enhancing our ability to manage
risks within the business. Together, we will create a leading West African gold company with production of more than 1 million ounces of gold annually, supported by a robust pipeline of development projects and a significantly enhanced exploration portfolio focused on the highly prospective Birimian Greenstone Belt. Read more about mining in West Africa With both companies having recently completed build-out
phases and mine ramp-ups, the combined business is well positioned for a
sustained period of strong cash flows. Our enhanced capital markets profile
should provide added trading liquidity, free float and size, characteristics
that investors are seeking in today’s market environment, and we will continue
to allocate capital in a disciplined and efficient manner with a focus on
maximizing shareholder returns.” Benoit Desormeaux, President and CEO of SEMAFO, explains that: "This transaction has received strong support from our
key shareholders who recognize it as an exciting value creating opportunity to
bring together two companies with common values and shared cultures built on
decades of successful West African experience. For our shareholders, this
transaction offers the benefits of both an upfront premium and a significant
re-rating opportunity within a stronger merged company. Our team, and I, are thrilled to be joining forces with Endeavour and we look forward to the opportunity to leverage our combined skill sets to create value for all shareholders. We will leverage our expertise in Montreal to build a technical hub to realize operational, technical and exploration synergies, while advancing studies on our enhanced project pipeline.”