African Utility Week and POWERGEN Africa will now run from 24-26 November 2020, CTICC, Cape Town, South Africa Following the South African Government’s announcement of a national state of disaster and subsequent ban on public gatherings of over 100 people, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Clarion Events Africa (formerly Spintelligent) is rescheduling African Utility Week and POWERGEN Africa. The event, which was due to take place from 12-14 May, will now run from 24 - 26 November 2020. The venue - CTICC in Cape Town, South Africa – remains unchanged. African Utility Week
and POWERGEN Africa attracts over
10,000 people from more than 90 countries and is the largest energy show in
Africa. 2020 marks its 20th anniversary. “The health and safety of our exhibitors, visitors, employees and the wider
public is of paramount importance to us,” said managing director David Ashdown. “Following the Government’s announcement, we have worked with industry to
reschedule African Utility Week and POWERGEN Africa to
November, in order to minimise
potential health risks to those connected to the event. “It is expected that the current challenges
presented by the Coronavirus will slow down significantly within the next few
months, which means the new November date for African Utility Week
and POWERGEN Africa will allow us
to deliver the most meaningful event in terms of maximising ROI for our
exhibitors and excellent content and experiences for our visitors. “The power sector in South Africa is facing
incredibly challenging times. By committing to running the event this year,
Clarion Events Africa can continue to drive energy security on the continent,
support the local industry and provide business-critical market opportunities
to support our exhibitors’ future prosperity.” A spokesperson for South Africa’s national
power utility, Eskom, said: “Eskom recognises the role that this event plays in
addressing the challenges facing the provision of electricity on the continent.
We recognise that COVID-19 presents unprecedented challenges and are glad that
a solution has been found to allow the event to continue this year. We look
forward to welcoming energy stakeholders from around the world to Cape Town in
November 2020.” Eskom is also the Host Utility of African Utility Week and POWERGEN
Africa. About Clarion EnergyAfrican Utility Week and POWERGEN Africa is organised by Clarion Energy, which is part of Clarion Events, and with over 40 events that cover the oil, gas, power and energy sectors, is one of the group’s largest portfolios. Websites: www.african-utility-week.comwww.powergenafrica.comwww.clarion-energy.com  https://clarionevents.com Media information For more information or to request an interview with event director Evan Schiff please contact Annemarie Roodbol on +27 (0) 82 562 7844 or annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com