In January 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the novel coronavirus, COVID-19, as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. This has
consequences for individual health, workplace impact and general economic
impact on countries. In early
February 2020 the Minerals Council provided members with material on mitigation
measures against the virus. The materials were based on communication from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), materials provided by the WHO, and were targeted at employees and translated into Afrikaans, isiZulu and Sesotho. Read: Minerals Council outlines 9-point plan for COVID-19 As concern
around the disease has intensified, so the Minerals Council and its members
have continued to monitor the situation globally and nationally; to engage and
align fully with the NICD planning for businesses and occupational health
settings; and to develop plans to reduce and mitigate its impact. That the
virus has now been confirmed to have arrived in South Africa emphasises the
importance of taking these actions. Planning
for and mitigating the impact on the mining sector We recognise
that the mining sector has special circumstances that could make it vulnerable to
transmission of infectious diseases such as COVID-19. Employees
congregate in areas of work, and travel in close proximity. As mining often
involves physical activity, there could be a high degree of exposure to the
virus simply through contact with people, machinery and equipment. Mining executives and officials who visit offshore operations are at risk of contracting the virus in other countries and bringing the infection into South African mines. Watch: Gold glitters again as COVID-19 wreaks havoc On the other
hand, the mining industry has extensive and existing systems in place to deal with
communicable diseases, the monitoring of health and provision of healthcare. The Minerals
Council has adopted a nine-point action plan that involves the following: The Minerals Council also stands ready to work with all relevant parts of government to manage the spread of the virus. Potential
impact on the industry The
potential impact on the industry is difficult to quantify.