ASX-listed diamond miner Lucapa Diamond Company has made some significant progress in its search for the hard-rock sources of the high-value alluvial diamonds being mined at the Lulo diamond project in Angola. Following highly-encouraging tributary sampling results in
February 2020, the project Lulo partners commenced a drilling programme in the
Canguige catchment area targeting five kimberlite pipes considered prospective
to host diamonds, along with two additional priority anomalies. Once the existing priority kimberlites are drilled, kimberlite bulk samples from these five pipes will be excavated for processing to test for diamonds. READ MORE: About Lucapa's 'excellence in mining' achievement here The Canguige catchment is upstream of the Cacuilo River
valley, where Lucapa and its partners have, for several years, been mining some
of the world’s highest-value and quality alluvial diamonds. The five kimberlites and two anomalies in the Canguige
catchment became the focus of the search for the primary source of the Lulo
alluvial diamonds following the recent recovery of 45 diamonds of up to 3.75
carats from a stream bulk sample taken from the Canguige tributary. Significantly, the 45 diamonds included a good population of white diamonds - including rare Type IIa gems and top D-colours - and a light fancy yellow. These diamond recoveries confirmed the Canguige catchment area contains at least one diamond-bearing kimberlite pipe contributing to the alluvial diamonds eroded downstream into the Cacuilo River valley. READ MORE: About Lulo's recent beneficiation deal The project Lulo partners have finished drilling the first
of the five high-priority kimberlite pipes in the Canguige catchment area and
are close to completing drilling of the second pipe. This drilling will determine where best to source the
kimberlite material selected for primary source bulk sampling. The drilling is
being conducted using the mobile Hanjin rig, which is track-mounted to enable
drilling during the Angolan wet season. March-April 2020 May-June 2020 The kimberlites being drilled have already undergone mineral chemistry analysis. If drilling of the new anomalies confirms the targets are kimberlites, they may be sent for mineral chemistry analysis.