Namibia Critical Metals has provided an update on progress of exploration on its Erongo Gold Project located near the town of Karibib in central Namibia. Erongo is one of three prospective gold projects in the company's portfolio within the emerging gold belt which hosts the Navachab and Otjikoto gold mines. The Company is undertaking a regional geochemical soil survey at Erongo to assess the potential for the discovery of orogenic/hydrothermal gold deposits similar to the nearby Navachab Gold Mine which is operated by QKR and the Twin Hills discovery of Osino Resources Corp. The Erongo Gold Project comprises 606 square kilometers situated 20 kilometers north of the Navachab gold mine and 10 kilometers northwest of the Twin Hills discovery. The project area is centered on the Erongo granitic intrusive complex which was emplaced into the older metasedimentary rocks of the Damaran orogeny which host the gold mineralization of interest at Navachab, Twin Hills and at the Otjikoto gold mine operated by B2 Gold which is located 230 kilometers to the northeast. Read: Namibia Critical Metals outlines work programme for Lofdal Don Burton, President of Namibia Critical Metals states: "Most investor attention is understandably focused on our heavy rare earth project at Lofdal where we have recently entered into a joint venture with the Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation ("JOGMEC"). "However, an important aspect of the Company's assets lies in the diversity of the commodities within our portfolio. Given the increasing recognition of the significance of Namibia's emerging gold belt, it is an appropriate moment to direct more attention to the gold potential in our Erongo, Otjiwarongo and Grootfontein projects." The Company has collected 2,500 soil samples to date on a systematic grid with a line spacing of 200 meters and sample spacing of 100 meters over the central sector of the priority area. These samples cover roughly 30% of the area of interest. Samples will be sieved and analyzed by handheld XRF over the next 3-4 weeks prior to submission for analysis. Selected samples will then be analyzed using low level detection limits (down to 0.2 ppb Au) to define areas of interest. Results from analyzes are therefore expected in mid-May and continuing sample coverage is planned to progress to the south. Impact of COVID-19 to operations The Company continues to closely monitor recommendations from Namibian health authorities and the World Health Organization concerning the mitigation of the Covid-19 pandemic. Current restrictions by the Namibian health authorities are being respected with regards to operations in the Khomas and Erongo Regions (encompassing the Windhoek-Swakopmund corridor) where travel restrictions have been implemented. Read more about COVID-19 This has affected continued field activity at Erongo for the time being however operations at Lofdal in the Kunene Region are continuing. Namibia Critical Metals has completed the first four drill holes at Lofdal and expects to report on first results in April.