The announcement by President Cyril Ramaphosa on regarding the evolving COVID-19 epidemic and emergency measures, has left many employers uncertain on the status of their expatriate employees and what should be done during the period of ‘lockdown’. Read with subsequent
announcements by DIRCO and guidance from the Department of Home Affairs and
other stakeholders; we are indeed in unchartered territory, where everyone has
little choice but to work together, keeping South Africa safe whilst minimising
the potential devastating impact on the economy. The President emphasised
in his Address that “Never before in the history of our Democracy have we been
confronted by such a severe situation”. Many expatriates and
their employers are not spared by the complexities. Why expatriates are
important? The employment of
expatriates in South Africa, can generally be classed into various work visa
categories. These categories have in
common that they are there to support and strengthen South Africa as a business
and investment destination, strengthen critical skills in South Africa and
otherwise allow employers to make business important appointments where the
required resource is not available to South Africa. These employees are
mostly a critical cog in the wheel of their employer, which becomes especially
important in times of complete economic uncertainty. We note below some
practical questions and answers for foreign nationals on work visas and their
employers: Visa expires of
expatriates from ‘high risk’ countries currently in South Africa Expatriates from “high
risk” countries currently in South Africa, and whose visas are due to expire,
are advised to apply for the extensions of their visas, within South Africa to
ensure that they remain compliant. Certain of these
renewals, such as inter-company work visa renewals, corporate visa holders and
those on short terms business visas; are normally not allowed in South Africa;
but these are extraordinary times. Travel to their home
countries will mean they will not be allowed to come back to South Africa, as
the foreign South African missions in these “high risk” countries are
prohibited from issuing visas. This is a special process
and must be done through the correct Home Affairs channels, and we recommend
that employers start this process as soon as possible. Visa expires of
expatriates from ‘medium risk’ countries currently in South Africa Expatriates from “medium risk” countries currently in South Africa, and whose visas are due to expire, are equally advised to renew within South Africa. Related articles:Minerals Council South Africa’s COVID-19 updateMantashe says no cases of COVID-19 within SA mining sector Whilst the foreign South
African missions can process these applications, there is the requirement of a
“certificate of clearance from the virus”, which may cause delay. Also, the employer and
expatriate run the risk that medium risk countries may be escalated to high
risk. Again, we recommend that
the Department of Home Affairs should be approached upfront for special
dispensation. Passport expires of
expatriates from a ‘restricted’ country Any passports that have
expired or are due to expire, may be renewed at the appropriate Consulate or
Embassy within South Africa, and visas currently endorsed into an expired or
full passport, will require an application for a ‘transfer of visa’ to be made
in order for the visa to be endorsed into the new passport once issued. This can be done in South
Africa. Expatriates are reminded
to ensure that they apply for passport renewals timeously as any subsequent
visa validity will be subjected thereto. New work visa acquired
but expatriate has not entered South Africa Any foreign national who
has visited high-risk countries in the past 20 days will be denied entry into
SA; and travellers from medium-risk countries will be required to undergo “high
intensity screening” before entering SA. Foreign nationals from
both “medium and high risk” countries who used to enter South Africa visa free,
will now be required to apply for a visa to be considered entry to South
Africa; this application will require inclusion of a health indication with a
“certificate of clearance from the virus”. Contradicting to the
above, and subject to further clarification from the Department, work visas
that have been issued from these countries, exclusive of China and Iran, and
not yet activated through ports of entry, have not been revoked or cancelled. However, these nationals
remain banned from South Africa until same has been lifted. We recommend that an
upfront confirmation process be adopted with the Department of Home Affairs or
relevant Foreign Mission, as opposed to ‘fingers crossed’ that entry will be
allowed. Expatriate on home
leave, in a ‘medium and high risk’ country The Minister of the
Department of Home Affairs indicated that flights are subject to an “advanced
passenger process” whereby a passenger log of each flight is submitted to the
Department and undergoes a verification process between the travel origin and
connecting flights for each passenger coming to South Africa. This will undergo further
review before disembarkation into South Africa to assess if any passengers may
not be permitted to enter South Africa. We recommend contact is
made prior to making travel arrangements to ensure entry into the country will
be allowed. Employers and expatriates
should take special note hereof and make sure that they get clearance upfront,
thus not risk being stranded in a system, currently in a state of flux. About to start the
process of new visa of work visa Where new resources are
required for business and/or for projects purposes, it is recommended that the
expatriate, supported by the South African employer, still immediately proceed
with the preparation (and filing where possible) of the required work visa
application(s) until further instructions have been received by the Department
of Home Affairs. No one knows how long
these measures will apply and with less travel visas issued; this is an
opportune time to start the process. Albeit restrictions have
been imposed on the travel of foreign nationals from “medium and high risk”
countries; the actual filing of visa applications have not been impacted in all
countries. Understandably, as the
economic impact of these restrictions must be limited, so it makes sense to use
this period to get necessary approvals now. This prevents being
caught in an expected rush later when restrictions are lifted and allows
business to get back to normal as soon as restrictions are over. UK is now closed,
china remains open The VFS office in the
United Kingdom is now formally closed, however, China remains open for
applications. Where enough business or
personal case exist, employers and expatriates caught by these closures, often
immediate and unexpected, can always approach the Department of Home Affairs
directly through the correct channels. There is also always a
discretion of the South African Embassy, and until clear instructions have been
received by them from the Department. Where applications are
being processed, applicants will be able to make the required arrangements in
order to proceed with travel to South Africa as soon as the travel bans have
been uplifted. Again, it is therefore imperative that applications are not delayed but filed (where permitted) as soon as possible as we expect an influx of applications once the travel bans are uplifted and some advance planning will ensure you are ahead of the rush. AUTHOR: Marisa Jacobs, Managing Director at Xpatweb