Teranga Gold has announced its consolidated production estimate for the first quarter 2020. It has provided an update on its company-wide response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. “Production, development and exploration are proceeding as planned and consolidated first quarter production is likely to be between 85,000 and 90,000 ounces as expected,” commented Paul Chawrun, COO. “As previously disclosed to the market, this will be Wahgnion’s strongest quarter of the year and Sabodala’s softest quarter due to lower grades processed as a result of pit sequencing.” Currently, both the Sabodala gold mine in Senegal and the Wahgnion gold mine in Burkina Faso are operating as expected. In addition, the development work to integrate the Massawa project with Sabodala as well as Teranga’s 2020 exploration activities are continuing as planned. The Company is working with the employees at Sabodala, Wahgnion and its various exploration sites to ensure continuity of operations while admittance to sites is being restricted. To minimize the impact of any potential supply chain disruptions, the Company has been building an inventory of critical supplies since January and confirms that supplies are continuing to arrive at both sites. Teranga has implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of the Company's workforce and to maintain business continuity. To date, there have been no confirmed cases of COVID-19 at any of the Company's operations or offices. Employees at the corporate and regional offices are working remotely. “Employee health and safety has always been a top priority at Teranga and we are taking extensive precautions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,” stated Richard Young, President and CEO. “The team has enhanced medical services at each mine site and ramped up infectious disease education, prevention, and management protocols across the company. "Both Sabodala and Wahgnion have entered an isolation period and a team of national and expatriate staff have volunteered to stay on site beyond their normal rotations to run the operations. "This measure, together with the many other precautionary directives already in place, are to protect both our staff and the local communities around our mines from the virus.”