With the spread COVID-19 increasing everyday - this is a particular examination on mining and what companies are doing to mitigate risk. Endeavour Mining has been informed that an employee at the Houndé mine in Burkina Faso tested positive for COVID-19. The employee experienced
mild symptoms hours after arriving at site, following his return from the UK. In line the Company’s
COVID-19 protocol and procedures, the Burkinabe health authorities were
immediately notified, and the employee was placed in quarantine. The small number of people who were in contact with the employee have all been identified and have also been placed in quarantine as part of the preventative measures. Related content:Minerals Council South Africa: Position on COVID-19Gold glitters again as COVID-19 wreaks havocMinerals Council South Africa outlines 9-point plan for COVID-19 As the employee did not
show symptoms upon arrival and passed the mandatory health screening, the company
further increased its preventive measures by introducing a mandatory 14-day
quarantine period for any employees or contractors arriving in Cote d’Ivoire or
Burkina Faso. Endeavour has not witnessed any impact to production or operations at any of its mines or exploration activities. The Company also has enough inventory of supplies and equipment, while suppliers have confirmed that placed and forecast orders are intact. According to Reuters a
worker at AngloGold Ashanti's Obuasi gold mine in Ghana has tested positive for
coronavirus. AngloGold Ashanti says
operations at the Obuasi mine will continue. The infected employee - a
Ghanaian who lives in mine accommodation and had recently returned from Britain
- is in self-isolation. AngloGold Ashanti said it is working with Ghana's
ministry of health to trace all contacts. Non-essential staff will
work remotely until further notice and any arriving travellers will be subject
to a mandatory two-week self-quarantine, the company said. Endeavour Mining earlier
reported a worker at its Houndé mine in Burkina Faso got coronavirus, also
after a trip to Britain. IAMGOLD Corporation is
taking the precautionary measure of closing its Toronto office for one week
following the positive COVID-19 test result for one of its employees. The IAMGOLD employee who
tested positive was last in the Toronto office on March 6, 2020. The individual is in
self-quarantine at home, and in stable condition with moderate symptoms. This employee attended two
private Company events and briefly attended the Northern Ontario Night on March
2, 2020 at the Steam Whistle Brewery but did not attend the PDAC convention or
other events. Attendees at the Company
events have been notified. Health and safety are our
top priority at IAMGOLD. In addition to closing the Toronto office, we are
conducting a deep cleaning and disinfection of the office. Toronto office employees
have been asked to work from home until the end of the week, March 20th, 2020,
at which point the Company will reassess. Kinross Gold Corporation was
informed on March 10, 2020 that an employee from its Toronto office tested
positive for the COVID-19 virus. Kinross values the health
and safety of its employees above all other priorities, and as a precaution,
closed the Toronto office today for a thorough cleaning and disinfection. Kinross has asked its
employees to work from home until at least March 20th when the need for the
closure will be re-evaluated. The Company is working
directly with Toronto Public Health (TPH) who used current evidence to
carefully assess the potential health risk, identify people who may have been
directly exposed to COVID-19 and actively follow up with them. TPH has also asked the
Company’s Toronto employees to self-monitor for any symptoms. The employee who tested
positive was last in the Toronto office for 1.5 days ending March 3, 2020, is
currently at home in self-quarantine, and is in good condition. This employee did not
attend the PDAC conference or other external events and has not recently
travelled to Kinross sites. The Company has activated
its business continuity program to help ensure that head office functions are
maintained while employees work remotely. The Company’s response is
being managed within the framework of preparedness protocols and contingency
plans developed by Kinross’ global cross-functional COVID-19 Task Force, which
was established earlier this year, with input from the Company’s expert medical
and travel advisors. These plans include
increased travel restrictions, individual site management controls and
screening to control access to mine sites, emergency medical preparedness,
supply chain contingency plans, and working with health authorities to closely
monitor local and global developments. To date, COVID-19 has not
impacted production or product shipments at any of the Company’s sites. Nor, to
date, has there been any significant negative impact on, or disruption of, the
Company’s supply chain. Nonetheless, Kinross is
constantly monitoring the situation and is working with its critical suppliers,
who the Company understands have mitigation plans in place, to minimize any
potential supply chain disruptions that might emerge. Kinross will continue to
prioritize the health and well-being of its employees, follow the advice of
Toronto Public Health, and continue to implement its comprehensive global
response plans. Golden Star Resources reports
on the procedures and controls that are being implemented to protect its
employees and ensure business continuity with respect to the potential risks
posed by the COVID-19 outbreak. The outbreak of the Coronavirus has now resulted in cases being reported in the Company's three operating countries. There have been several reported cases of infection in the United Kingdom and Canada where the company operates corporate offices, and the first cases have now been reported in Ghana where Golden Star operates two gold mines, Wassa and Prestea.