Emmerson Plc, the Moroccan focused potash development company, has completed the full cost estimate for the capex required to ensure electricity and gas supply at its 100%-owned Khemisset Potash Project in Morocco. Khemisset is a potentially world class potash development,
with industry leading, low, capital cost to production and, as a result of its
location, among the highest margins in the potash industry. This work has been completed by independent consultant Golder Associates with the assistance of key local partners, as part of the forthcoming Feasibility Study, which is ahead of schedule, with delivery now expected in the early part of Q2 2020 instead of previously planned end of H1 2020. Read more about specialty minerals These estimates have confirmed the potential for significant
capital cost savings for the Project due to its proximity to excellent
infrastructure. Hayden Locke, CEO of Emmerson, comments: "We continue to be pleased with the forward momentum we
have achieved in developing the potentially world class Khemisset Potash
Project. “The Project’s location, geology and access to outstanding
infrastructure provide significant capital cost savings relative to our peers
and enhance management's strong belief in the potential for Khemisset to be a
low capital cost potash mine development. “Morocco has invested heavily in electrical generation and
transmission capacity throughout the country and has developed an attractive
renewable energy framework. “As a result, the Project is within close proximity to
several Very High Voltage power lines with confirmed capacity for a mine the
scale of Khemisset. “Morocco’s forward-thinking legislation, to promote renewable energy development, provides additional benefits to the Project including tariff reductions, while reducing the overall carbon footprint of the mine. Read more about mining in North Africa "Through continued discussions with our gas supply
partner, it has reiterated its willingness to fund, design, build and maintain
the gas storage infrastructure required for processing the potash ore, saving
Khemisset considerable capital expenditure. "The Feasibility Study continues to track well ahead of
schedule, and we are confident that it will be delivered towards the front end
of Q2 2020 rather than the end of 1H 2020 as previously advised." Highlights