While the cogs have turned slowly in what has been the first class action settlement of its kind in South Africa, mine workers that have been affected by occupational lung diseases including silicosis and tuberculosis from working in South Africa’s gold mines will soon start being compensated by the companies for which they worked. CHANTELLE KOTZE reports. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 3, 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here The compensation for workers
suffering from occupational lung diseases is the outcome of a three-year long negotiation
process, between Richard Spoor Inc, Abrahams
Kiewitz Inc and the Legal Resources Centre – representing claimants in the
silicosis and tuberculosis class action litigation – and the Occupational Lung
Disease (OLD) Working Group – representing African Rainbow Minerals, Anglo American
SA, AngloGold Ashanti, Gold Fields, Harmony Gold Mining Company and
Sibanye-Stillwater, which culminated in a R5 billion settlement agreement, which was reached
on 3 May 2018. The agreement provides for compensation to all eligible
gold mineworkers (or their dependants) suffering from silicosis and/or who
contracted work-related tuberculosis. Eligibility is based on a mine worker
having worked for a mine owned or managed by any of the six companies that are
party to the settlement at any time between 12 March 1965 and 10 December 2019 –
the date at which the settlement agreement became effective. However, before the agreement could
become effective, class action members were given the right to opt out of the
agreement if they so wished. The 90-day opt out period ended on 24 November
2019. The opt-out submissions underwent an independent audit and the outcome
was that only three members chose to opt out. Fair, adequate and reasonable settlement Speaking at
the media briefing, Michael Murray, chairperson of the OLD Working Group (which acts as a
platform with which to engage all stakeholders including mining companies and
unions, the regulators, medical professionals and others), said that this
settlement is significantly better crafted and has better outcomes than any
result that the claimants’ lawyers or the mining companies could have ever
achieved and could be used as a model for other disputes that may come forward
in future. According to Murray, the settlement saw parties able to
benefit from the dispute in a way that they could not otherwise in the
following ways: Establishment of Tshiamiso Trust now
under way The Tshiamiso Trust, which will
identify and certify, as well as oversee the processing of claims and payment
of benefits to those eligible, was registered on 28 November 2019. Initial work has focused on the
logistics of establishing offices, not only in and around South Africa’s labour
sending areas, but also within the common labour sending areas of Mozambique,
eSwatini, Lesotho and Botswana from which a
majority of the historical mine workers had been sourced. Resources are
currently being focused in Lesotho and the Eastern Cape, from where the bulk of
South Africa’s gold mines drew its labour. While Murray believes close to one
million mine workers could be considered as potential claimants, owing to the sheer
number that worked on South Africa’s gold mines over the past-half century, he
expects fewer than 100 000 people to be certified as eligible for compensation. Additionally, the appointment of
the full Board of Trustees, which will comprise seven members, including the
CCOD, is now under way. Silicosis claims broadly fall into
three classes of compensation, depending on the severity of claimants’ illness,
namely: An additional class – Silicosis
Class 1 – has been added to the settlement agreement. While not compensable in
terms of ODMWA, the settlement makes provision for mineworkers in this class,
where eligible workers will be compensated R70 000 if they suffer from an early stage of silicosis, with lung function impairment of up to 10%. There are also three classes of
tuberculosis for which compensation will be paid. Where an eligible claimant
has passed away, his or her dependant will be entitled to claim. With first pay-outs expected at
the end of June, further details on the establishment of the Trust and how
potential beneficiaries can establish whether they might be eligible for
compensation under the Trust and, if they are potentially eligible, how to go
about establishing a claim, will be made in due course. Ensuring
a healthier future The OLD Working Group, which was
established in 2014, initially by five current and past gold mining companies,
but soon extended to six, was aimed at creating a better compensation system that is both fair
to past, present and future gold miners – and one that is also sustainable for
the gold sector. Over
and above facilitating the class action settlement compensation, the OLD
Working Group aims at overcoming the significant shortcomings of the Medical
Bureau for Occupational Diseases (MBOD) where statutory compensation is paid to
mineworkers. In
doing so, the OLD Working Group, and the Minerals Council, work hand-in-hand
with the CCOD to improve the administration of the MBOD and speed up the
statutory compensation payments to eligible claimants. Equally
important, the OLD Working Group is also working toward ensuring that the right compensation system, with compensation
coverage for all employees who join the industry in the future, is employed. According to
Murray, this is the application of the Compensation for Occupational Injuries
and Diseases Act (COIDA) across the board – as COIDA is a progressive
compensation system that is compliant with standards set by the International
Labour Organisation. “By having
all new members of the industry covered by COIDA, this will ensure that mineworkers
who become sick or are injured in the course of their employment are eligible
for substantially higher compensation than employees suffering occupational
lung disease, who currently fall under ODMWA.” While this legislative reform is still in the pipeline, Murray believes that this should significantly improve the benefits to new mineworkers but would likely also preclude future litigation.