Matasis Investment Holdings has recently concluded a 35% BEE equity transaction with Worley RSA, which will see the two businesses working closely together to provide transformative solutions to the complex challenges facing southern Africa’s resources, energy and chemicals sectors. Co-founded by Manne Dipico and Zahid Faqui-Dawood in
2006, Matasis invests, structures and raises funding for management and
leveraged buy-outs, as well as strategic BEE transactions. The business’
investment targets are shaped by a careful selection process that identifies
where Matasis can add significant value through direct involvement; and focuses
on partnerships that are founded on a genuine commitment to South Africa’s
transformation agenda. Since its inception, Matasis has participated in a
number of key transactions, primarily in the natural resources and allied
industries, with a portfolio focused on achieving above-average returns from
privately negotiated investments in companies with principal operations in
southern Africa. CEO of Matasis Investment Holdings, Yusuf Vorajee,
says the business is committed to creating fully operational, active
partnerships by acquiring significant and meaningful equity in a limited number
of South African companies. Through active involvement in investee companies,
the business facilitates the participation of historically marginalised
citizens in the economic prospects and growth in South Africa. Denver Dreyer, Worley Senior Vice President for
Mining, Minerals & Metals, Europe, Middle East and Africa, says the equity
transaction with Matasis will be mutually beneficial for both businesses.
“Worley is a pre-eminent global provider of professional project and asset
services in energy, chemicals and resources, and we recognise these sectors as
the primary drivers for employment and transformation in our country.
Understanding the value of the local market is a key element of Worley South
Africa’s business strategy, and by partnering with a well-entrenched local
transformative business such as Matasis, we can use our global expertise to add
real value to transformation in South Africa.” Chairman of Matasis Investment Holdings, Manne Dipico,
says that the equity transaction with Worley RSA is an active partnership.
“Worley has embraced our business and we will be full participants in the
decision-making processes. We are excited about this opportunity and view it as
the next phase of Matasis’s portfolio, adding value and a global perspective to
our local and regional investment strategies.” Dipico explains that Matasis is not typically focusing
solely on the local market, but rather takes a broader, regional approach when
selecting investment partners. “Worley recognised our commitment to the wider
development of southern Africa and through this transaction we can now
integrate regional development with Worley’s global reach and continue to
develop strong competencies, contracts and resources in this regard.” Matasis Investment Holdings has a 35% equity stake in
Jacobs Matasis, which was previously the South African arm of Jacobs Energy
Chemicals and Resources (ECR). Earlier this year, Jacobs’ ECR line of business
was acquired by WorleyParsons, with the combined entity uniting under a new
brand – Worley – in April 2019. Dreyer says that this merger increased Worley’s global
footprint in the minerals, metals and mining sectors, highlighting the South
African operations as a Global Centre of Excellence in mining and minerals
processing for the group. Robert Hull, Worley’s Vice President for Mining,
Minerals & Metals Africa, concurs that Matasis is an excellent fit for
Worley. “Matasis has made it clear that they want to be full participants in
this equity transaction. They have an active interest in Worley’s business and
deep local knowledge that they bring to the table,” says Hull. Matasis has a proven track record of entrepreneurial,
managerial, organisational and financial skills, and the business has become a
partner of choice for a number of leading multi-national companies in South
Africa. Furthermore, Matasis has strong strategic networks within South Africa
and in the southern African region, as well as its own active Corporate and
Social Investment Foundation. “We are living in a transformative economy and in a
world of complex challenges. With a new focus, a new energy, and a new brand,
Worley and its partners are ideally positioned to offer our customers
transformative solutions,” says Dreyer. Operating as Worley Matasis, Worley’s energy and chemicals (E&C) services business in South Africa includes key strengths from the heritage Jacobs ECR business of complex petrochemical and chemical projects, hydrocarbons projects, including onshore and offshore production facilities and integrated project delivery, construction and technical services. Worley RSA comprises the mining, minerals and metals (MM&M) related businesses of Worley in South Africa. Worley combines world-leading, concept-to-completion expertise with design and major project delivery capabilities for the minerals and metals sector, from bulk commodities to rare earths, with complete mine-to-market solutions from inception to rehabilitation. 