ASX-listed gold explorer and developer Amani Gold has achieved a substantial upgrade to the mineral resource at the Kebigada gold deposit within the Giro gold project in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The mineral resource now stands at 124 Mt grading at 1.03g/t of
gold for 4.1 Moz of gold at a cut-off grade of 0.5g/t. The new mineral resource estimate represents a 28% or 800 000 oz increase in contained gold over the previous estimate of 75 Mt grading at 1.18g/t gold, for 2.9 Moz of gold at a cut-off grade of 0.6g/t. READ MORE: Amani Gold on track to become a major gold tenement holder The global resource at the Kebigada and Douze Match deposits within the Giro gold project have exceeded Amani Gold’s milestone of 4 Moz and these deposits continue to provide ongoing success in terms of gold exploration results and project scale. “The new mineral resource upgrade for Kebigada at over 4.1Moz
gold is a milestone for Amani and confirms our strategy of targeted deeper
drilling,” says Amani Gold technical director Grant Thomas. “Kebigada, even now, remains open at depth along the entire
strike of the orebody. We believe we have a major gold deposit here at Giro,
and Amani now has a very solid resource base to move to our aim of significant
gold production from a new African gold mine,” Thomas adds. The Giro gold project comprises two exploration permits
covering a surface area of 497 km² and lies within the Kilo-Moto Belt of the
DRC, a significant under-explored greenstone belt which hosts Randgold
Resources’ 17 Moz Kibali group of deposits within 35 km of Giro. The nearby
Kibali gold project produces in excess of 600 000 ozpa of gold. The new Kebigada resource follows diamond core drilling
results which successfully targeted deeper high-grade sulphide associated gold
mineralisation within the central core of the Kebigada deposit. Planned exploration activities Holes GRDD034 and GRDD035 have both outlined high-grade gold
mineralisation deeper than previously intersected at the Kebigada deposit.
These gold assay results and the current Kebigada mineral resource estimate
indicates the potential for the Kebigada deposit to substantially grow via targeted
deeper drilling along the entire strike of the orebody. Amani plans to complete 200 m spaced drilling north and south
of drill holes GRDD034 and GRDD035 and similar spaced drill holes along the
western edge of the deposit. This planned drilling campaign will involve 12 core holes, each nominally 500 m in length for a total of 6 000 m. This drilling campaign is expected to commence in May/June 2020. The Democratic Republic of Congo is a hotspot for mining. Trending topics in the region will be discussed at DRC Mining Week in June. Find out more about the event here or download the brochure here. 