ASX-listed West African gold explorer and developer Tietto Minerals' recent high-grade gold results, demonstrates the continued growth of its Abujar‐Gludehi gold mineralised system, part of its 2.2 Moz Abujar gold project, in Côte d’Ivoire, West Africa. “Extensional drilling at Abujar‐Gludehi (AG) under the
high‐grade core (19.3 Mt at 2.2g/t gold for 1.38 Moz) has intersected multiple
stacked lodes of high‐grade gold mineralisation over good widths,” says Tietto
MD Dr Caigen Wang. “ZDD180 has reported multiple high‐grade lodes; 10 m at 12.09 g/t gold from 286 m and 6 m at 9.35 g/t gold from 317 m within this structure. In aggregate, these intervals report just under 200 gold gram metres. This is a high impact hole that will significantly add to the high‐grade core of the AG resource.” Read more: Tietto the winner at Mining Indaba “Our drilling team continues to efficiently deliver drill metres
at some of the most cost‐effective rates in the industry. We recently completed
the deepest hole drilled yet at AG – 550.5 m for ZDD190. Assay results for this
hole are awaiting and could potentially extend gold mineralisation by more than
120 m down dip compared to the November 2019 resource model.” “We will soon have five drill rigs working at Abujar, and the company remains on track to deliver our resource update in Q3, 2020. We have implemented extensive hygiene and self‐isolation policies to protect our workforce and mitigate any potential impact from COVID‐19 in Côte d’Ivoire. We have experienced no issues in ramping up our drilling programme.” READ MORE: About the latest on COVID-19's impact on mining Tietto’s fully funded 50 000 m drill programme continues
with the goal of increasing the resource inventory of existing deposits as well
as identifying new prospects within the Abujar project’s 70 km long gold
corridor, of which 90% of the strike length remains to be tested. Tietto has recently commenced drilling on the Gamina prospect,
a 4.5 km untested strike‐length immediately north of the high‐grade AG deposit. Gamina contains extensive large‐ scale artisanal workings
and drilling has intersected visible gold in the first two drill holes but
assays are pending. Tietto continues to benefit from operating with some of the lowest exploration costs in the gold sector and will soon have five company‐owned rigs driving this cost efficiency. This will ensure a steady flow of drill results which will be incorporated into an Abujar resource update scheduled for Q3, 2020, building on the existing 2.2 Moz gold resource.