ASX-listed exploration and development company Minbos Resources’ bid for the Cácata Phosphate concession, located in Cabinda, Angola, has been successful. In late October 2019, Minbos advised of its intention to formally make an application for the Republic of Angola’s Ministry of Mineral Resources and Petroleum public tender for Mining Rights Grants for the the Cácata Concessions, which included the area previously held by Minbos in Cabinda – also known as the Cabinda phosphate project. READ MORE: Angola is open for business with relaxed visa requirements At the opening of the tenders in December 2019, the Angolan
Ministry of Mineral Resources and Petroleum indicated it was targeting the end
of February to notify successful bidders, the end of May to negotiate and
finalise Mining Investment Contracts with the successful bidders, with a view
to signing the Mining Investment Contracts in June upon which the mineral
rights are formally granted. Under the terms of the tender, it is anticipated that Minbos
will be granted the equivalent of an exploration licence over the project area.
The work commitments on the exploration licence will be negotiated with the Angolan
Ministry of Mineral Resources and Petroleum during the next few months and
prior to execution of the Mining Investment Contracts. Other than the normal fees paid for Mining Licenses under
the Angolan Mining Code, which is less than $1 000 per year for the first five
years, no additional fees have been proposed. The negotiation of a Mining Investment
Contract is normal procedure in Angola following the nomination of the
preferred applicant/bidder. Minbos is not aware of any impediment to the successfully
negotiation of a Mining Investment Contract. Minbos has been classified as the
preferred bidder and believes its unique proposal will be of great benefit to
the country. With the awarding of the tender, the sompany has a strong platform
to develop the Cácata deposit having spent A$20 million on exploration and
feasibility studies on the phosphate projects in the Congo Basin. Minbos CEO Lindsay Reed thanked the Government of Angola, which
undertook a world-class tender process, demonstrating professionalism and transparency
throughout the process as well as Minbos in-country Advisor Mr Camache
Caturichi, who worked tirelessly to assist on the tender. “This successful bid is the culmination of more than two
years of work by the board and the Minbos team to firstly, re-build government
support lost during the joint venture years and secondly, to successfully
present a plan for the Cácata Concession that unlocks its potential for the
region,” says Reed. The Cácata Concession
at a glance The Cácata Concession is located 50 km from Porto de Caio,
along sealed roads to the newly completed deep-water port, close to existing
gas and electricity supplies. Prior to Minbos securing joint venture rights to Cabinda concessions in 2010, the Cabinda concessions had seen a large amount of previous exploration with drilling and metallurgical testwork being carried out in the early 1970’s, providing the Company had a strong base to produce a high-grade concentrate and/or a value-added fertiliser to maximise returns. The company completed two drilling programmes (59 holes for a
total of 2 561 m) at the Cácata concessions during 2010/11 with the results
indicating that Cácata could become a world-class, low-cost DSO Phosphate
Project. These exploration results were disclosed by the company
under the 2004 edition of the JORC Code and have not been updated since to
comply with the JORC Code 2012 on the basis that the information has not
materially changed since it was last reported. In late August 2011, Minbos released a maiden indicated
JORC-compliant resource and Reed was appointed as CEO in 2014 to guide the
company through its bankable feasibility study (BFS) which commenced in April
2016. The current mineral resource at Cácata is 27 Mt grading at
17.7% P2O5 in the measured, indicated and inferred
categories, which includes a higher grade “scrub and screen” resource of 13.1
Mt grading at 26.0% P2O5 in the measured and indicated
categories. In October 2017, as part of the testwork and suitability
process, the company provided bulk samples to the International Fertilizer
Development Center (IFDC) to undertake characterisation and agronomic trials to
confirm its suitability for use on Angolan soils and crops. Minbos believes the agricultural impact of the enhanced
phosphate rock project has the potential to transform Angola and the wider
Congo Basin. The project could supply all of the phosphate nutrient
requirements for the country; however, its most important contribution will be
the ability to customise a phosphate nutrient granule to tailor phosphate
release timing, incorporate micronutrients to specification, and reduce the
economic scale size for phosphate granule production. Minbo, which plans to deliver high yield/low-cost phosphate fertiliser to the mutual benefit of local farmers and agribusiness and delivering value for its shareholders, will announce its plans for the project including timetables, scope, offtake, approvals and funding in the next few months.