Further to the 21-day national lockdown announced by South Africa’s President Cyril Ramaphosa to address the spread of COVID-19 in the country, Harmony Gold Mining has provided the following update. Committed to curb the
spread of COVID-19 “The health and safety of
all of our employees – and in particular those who continue to work on the care
and maintenance of our mines, as well as at Hidden Valley – remain our highest
priorities. “We continue to ensure compliance with all prescribed and recommended preventive measures – in both South Africa and Papua New Guinea,” says Harmony’s CEO, Peter Steenkamp. Underground mining
operations in South Africa All nine of the Company’s underground mines in South Africa have ceased mining and are now on care and maintenance in terms of the requirements of the national lockdown. Care and maintenance includes the continued provision of various essential services such as water, power and security and the operation of health hubs at each mine. Surface treatment
plants and surface retreatment operations All surface treatment
plants at the underground mines continue to process pre-existing surface reef
and waste, and surface retreatment operations continue to treat surface
tailings, in line with the concessions announced by the Minister of Mineral
Resources and Energy on 25 March 2020. Open-pit mining
operation in South Africa Kalgold, the Company’s open-pit mining operation in South Africa’s North West Province, continues to mine and treat its ore at a reduced rate. Read more about gold mining Limited gold
production during lockdown It is anticipated that Harmony will only produce between 650 kg to 700 kg of gold in South Africa during the 21-day lockdown period. Cash preservation is key,
and as such all exploration and capital projects have been suspended. Hidden Valley Hidden Valley will continue to mine in line with its plan, subject to any directives issued in line with PNG’s National Security Plan of Action in response to COVID-19. Read more about COVID-19