Privately-held gold miner Nordgold has made a non-binding indicative and conditional proposal to acquire all the issued share capital of ASX-listed gold junior Cardinal Resources not already owned by Nordgold. Nordgold currently owns approximately 98.4 million shares in Cardinal Resources, which includes the 16.5%, which it is in the process of acquired from Gold Fields at a price of 45c, giving it voting power of approximately 19.9% of the total share capital outstanding. READ MORE: Nordgold increases investment into Employee Development The
preliminary proposal by Nordgold, which will be financed through Nordgold’s
existing cash reserves and facilities, values the equity of Cardinal Resources at
approximately A$227 million (or US$143 million) and represents a cash premium
of 83% to Cardinal’s closing price on 13 March. Nordgold
is seeking confirmatory due diligence from Cardinal Resources to access on
certain key aspects of Cardinal’s Namdini gold project, in Ghana, on which a
feasibility study was completed in October 2019. Cardinal
has been looking since approximately H1 2019 to source project financing, and
is concurrently evaluating strategic alternatives to bring the Namdini Project
into production. Nordgold
has indicated it will work constructively with Cardinal to expedite its
confirmatory due diligence with the aim of completing it within a four week
period. Following
the successful completion of confirmatory due diligence to Nordgold’s satisfaction,
Nordgold would seek to formulate a binding preliminary proposal. Nordgold, which currently operates ten mines, with four of these in West Africa (three in Burkina Faso and one in Guinea, is strategically committed to West Africa and believes that it is strongly positioned to bring the Namdini Project into production based on its development and operational expertise in the region and robust balance sheet. READ MORE: Gold price drivers – all roads lead to West Africa According to Nordgold CEO Nikolai Zelenski, Chief
Executive Officer, the company’s preliminary
proposal to acquire Cardinal Resources would represent a substantial cash
premium for Cardinal shareholders and provides an immediate opportunity to
realise value without the associated risks of project development. “Nordgold is committed to operating in West Africa, and has the proven development experience and balance sheet to bring Namdini into production to the benefit of the local community and all stakeholders,” concludes Zelenski.