The South African mining industry is facing a unique set of challenges in the form of the cost and unreliability of electricity supply, disruption and destruction of equipment, an unstable regulatory and legal framework in addition to the possibility of a Coronavirus black swan event that could devastate the mining sector. Coupled to this, the mining insurance sector has been particularly hard hit by claims related to natural catastrophes, strikes and riots, equipment failure and fires over the past three years. This is according to Paul Pryor, Aon’s Global Mining Practice Leader. “Mining insurance rates steadily decreased from 2011 to 2016, however with a returned loss ratio of >100% for the mining insurance market in 2017 and 2018, rates levelled out in late 2017, increased by single digits in 2018 and with double digits in 2019. "As a result, underwriters have become more selective in the risks that they will consider and markets are reluctant to write any new business unless ‘adequately priced’, leading to substantially higher rates than seen in previous years,” explains Pryor. These
developments have a very clear domino effect on the market: Managing
mining sector insurance rates In Aon’s recent global risk management survey, business interruption (BI), accelerated rates of change in market conditions and fluctuating commodity prices were listed as the top three risks facing the mining sector. All three require robust risk management processes to facilitate risk-averse mining growth and development in addition to underscoring favourable insurance rates,” Pryor says. Factors
that may influence insurance rates, include: “It
is of paramount importance to do your homework, thoroughly, in order to provide
the underwriter with documentation that paints an accurate picture of the state
of your operations as well as measures undertaken to address risk.  These
would include recent engineering surveys, responses to risk recommendations,
detailed descriptions of mining operations, engineering information on tailings
dams, water management as well as an accurate overview of cover that is
required, including property damage and business interruption values,” says
Pryor. “Compiling
a comprehensive risk management programme that is able to positively
demonstrate to an insurance underwriter how you are addressing the instance of
a loss occurring and/or minimising the resultant loss, will go a long way to
secure a favourable risk analysis and rating,” he explains. Aon
outlines strategies for securing a successful mining insurance programme: