Paladin Energy continues to focus on reducing cash expenditure and maximising the value of the strategically significant Langer Heinrich operation. Given the developments
that have occurred after Paladin’s December quarterly update the Company
provides the following business activity update. Kayelekera Sale The Company announced on
13 March 2020 the completion of the sale of its 85% interest in Paladin (Africa)
to Lotus Resources (65%) and Lily Resources (20%). Paladin will hold the interest
on trust, pending receipt of the final in-country approvals. Importantly, the
sale of Kayelekera reduces Paladin’s forecast cash expenditure by approximately
US$5 million per annum. The completion of the
sale is a positive step forward for Paladin and one which will allow the
Company to prioritise its efforts and resources on maximising the value of the
Langer Heinrich operation. Langer Heinrich
optimisation study update In October 2019 the Company announced the results of a pre-feasibility study to optimise the restart of the Langer Heinrich operation. Read more about uranium:Extension granted for completion of uranium acquisitionGoviEx’s Madaouela uranium project – first mover advantage in AfricaListing opens up global investment in uranium The Company continues to refine
its restart plans and expects to update the market further, including extensive
guidance on key economic parameters, during Q4 FY2020. Langer Heinrich remains a
strategically important, proven operation with a historic production capacity
of 5.2Mlb pa. Uranium production was suspended,
and the operation transitioned into care and maintenance in May 2018. The existing
infrastructure and mine development at Langer Heinrich provide an opportunity
for a rapid restart of operations and delivers a lower incentive price for
restart than greenfield mine development projects. The operation is in
‘mining-friendly’ Namibia and holds all the required permits for restart. Paladin is well
positioned to be an early mover in a recovering uranium market, however, the
Company will only consider a restart of the Langer Heinrich Mine when it
secures a uranium term-price contract with sufficient tenure and value to
secure an appropriate level of return to stakeholders. Cash expenditure and balance
sheet Paladin currently has an estimated unrestricted cash balance of US$35 million, after Kayelekera sale costs. Following the sale of the
Kayelekera Mine on the 13 March 2020, Paladin’s total cash spend for FY2021 is
forecast to reduce by approximately US$5 million to less than US$10 million pa. The Company’s senior debt
has been in place since 25 January 2018. The balance of the debt at the end of
February 2020, including accrued interest, was US$138 million. The debt is repayable on
25 January 2023 and the Company expects to continue accruing interest (10%) for
the remainder of the term. Board and management Over recent months, the
Company has significantly restructured its Board and Executive Management Team
to provide the technical and commercial skill set necessary to lead the Company
going forward. The Company has
previously announced the following changes: The CEO has now finalised
his Executive Management Team as follows: