Roxgold has released its fourth quarter and full year financial results for the period ended December 31, 2019. “It has been a transformative year for Roxgold with the Séguéla Gold Project acquisition and recent exploration success with the new high grade discovery at Boussoura,” comments John Dorward, President and CEO of Roxgold.” "At Yaramoko, we continued to see strong operating performance and cashflow generation. Yaramoko achieved record production of 142,204 ounces of gold and record plant throughput of 466,157 tonnes exceeding nameplate capacity by 16% in 2019. Read more about gold "We have also delivered on our growth objectives by successfully achieving commercial production at the Bagassi South mine in September 2019. As a result of the strong operational performance, we generated approximately $100 million in cash flow from mining operations for the year. Read: Roxgold records exceeds nameplate capacity by 30% "This has enabled us to strengthen our balance sheet finishing the year with approximately $42 million in cash and in a net cash position of $16 million. “We are looking forward to an exciting 2020 as we rapidly advance the Séguéla Gold Project. The Séguéla Gold Project has become a substantial value accretive project for Roxgold, and we believe the updated mineral resource announced in January 2020 underscores the potential for this project to deliver on our aspirations of being the next West African multi-asset gold producer. "Our next priority will be the completion of a preliminary economic assessment on the Séguéla Gold Project in the second quarter of this year. We are very excited by Séguéla’s significant potential, notably at the Ancien deposit which remains open at depth and along strike, as well as the potential within the Boulder-Agouti corridor and the additional 22 highly prospective targets that have been identified. Read more about mining in West Africa "At Boussoura, we look forward to growing the current mineralized footprint and setting up the potential for Roxgold’s third high grade project.” Full year 2019 highlights: During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company: Fourth quarter 2019 highlights: During the quarter ended December 31, 2019, the Company: 