ASX/LSE-listed
Danakali has announced the Colluli Mining Share Company has successfully
executed EPCM Phase 1 of Project development and has now moved to Phase 2. The Owner’s
Project Team based in Johannesburg and led by Project Director Tony Harrington,
has made significant progress with the delivery of Phase 1, on schedule, on
budget and in line with the Front-End Engineering Design (FEED). This takes Colluli closer to the construction phase and then into production in 2022. Read: Danakali commences with phase 1 of EPCM at Colluli As part of
the management support by DRA Global (DRA), all Project Systems, Project
Controls and Progress measurement systems are in place, and the team is now
focused on securing key Mining Services agreements and developing execution
strategy. Project Director, Tony Harrington, says: "It has been a busy start to the year with a number of work streams being progressed. "It is encouraging to see a collaborative team providing a strong professional approach, that is experienced and understands the importance of delivering a fit for purpose process plant with a shared objective to achieve the shortest path to revenue. "The FEED pricing reconfirmation is underway, and we are pleased to have identified several optimisation and cost saving opportunities which we are incorporating in further planning. “We have now commenced Phase 2 of the Project development allowing us to further de-risk the development by greater definition of cost, schedule and design." Read: US$200 million secured for Colluli Potash Project Site based
Reverse Osmoses (RO) plant will be constructed by a South African manufacturer
with expected delivery in Q3 2020. The facility
is one of the key components to de-risk the development schedule and will be
used to provide potable and construction water prior to the commissioning of
the main Anfile Bay Water Intake Area (WITA). WITA design
is currently under development by DRA in Cape Town. The
Geotechnical Investigation contract, final terms and conditions being agreed
with a selected major multinational consultancy firm. The design
outcomes will outline further structural mapping and 3D modelling, that shall
ensure accuracy and assist with the construction planning. Significant
progress has been made on securing key contractors for onsite works, with Earth
Moving Worldwide to provide mining services, Turner and Townsend to support the
Owner’s Team and DRA engaged for the provision of EPCM services. Development
of the Early Works packages have commenced with remaining tender procedures to
be finalised in early Q2, 2020. Earlier in February, the Danakali Executive team participated at Investing in African Indaba conference where it has met with industry partners and co-hosted Africa Finance Corporation’s annual conference, following the confirmation of AFC’s US$50 million strategic equity investment. Read more about mining in East Africa Colluli is
now fully on track with mobilisation (phases 1 & 2) and commencement of
construction in Q3 2020. Upon finalisation of remaining activities within Phase 2, Danakali will be hosting a site visit to Colluli for analysts and investors in Q2, 2020.