Continuous engineering improvements have no doubt contributed to Vibramech securing its largest single order in its 43rd year of operation – which entails the supply of over 30 units of vibrating equipment to the latest state-of-the-art marine diamond processing vessel in 2020. The equipment in question ranges from heavy duty/high capacity primary scalping screens to diamond recovery feeders. The large primary scalping screens (the largest operational on sea going processing plants) have been methodically designed and tailor-made for this specific application and have been designed using the latest finite element and strain gauge techniques. “We are pleased by the fact that we have a dedicated +25-year database comprising our meticulous developments, which have empirically improved the longevity of our vibrating equipment, in particular for those used in the marine diamond processing industry,” starts Vibramech MD David Massey. “Underlying these developments are our client relationships, through which we not only receive valuable feedback on their requirements, but with whom we closely work to implement innovative ideas.” The feature image on this page is one example of Vibramech’s flagship double deck marine specification primary screens (overall measurements of 4.1 m x 7.1 m, at 25 t). Two of these were delivered during August 2020. This is a benchmark for an exciter driven screen, under the SIEBTECHNIK license exclusively held by Vibramech since 2005. Moreover, these particular exciters are specially adapted for marine conditions, in that the exciter weights are protected with stainless steel guards, the studs are given additional anti-corrosion protections and provision is made to monitor the oil levels and the client is able to adapt the quality of the lubrication, in an easily accessible manner. Vibramech’s engineering developments have led to substantially improved wear resistance (on its range of vibrating equipment supplied to the marine diamond processing industry), by the use of special features such as huck collar protection, abundant use of stainless steel and galvanised components, thicker side plates, rubber lining on the complete internal surface of the side plates and ceramic coating on all internal exposed surfaces, which are not wear protected by rubber lining. Going strong Vibramech is southern Africa’s largest manufacturer of vibrating mineral processing equipment. “We engineer solutions for each client’s unique mineral processing requirements. Our current installed base of over 15 000 pieces of equipment makes us the Southern African leader in market share. “We are proud to be the preferred supplier of vibrating equipment to project houses and mines in the region, and we have earned the reputation of being an OEM that designs and manufactures robust and durable screening equipment,” notes Massey. Vibramech furthermore supplies its equipment to mining and minerals processing industries throughout Africa, Eurasia, Australasia, North and South America. The company’s equipment is operating in processing plants, ocean vessels and mining operations world-wide, and it has extensive experience in gold, diamond, coal, iron ore, manganese, platinum, chrome, nickel, uranium, copper, mineral sands and aggregate operations. Vibramech remains confident for 2020 and 2021, as it fully understands the harsh operating conditions which vibrating screens, grizzlies and feeders are subjected to in the mining industry. As such, the company is cognisant that its designs need to cater for both abrasive and corrosive environments. “Our equipment needs to withstand the high wear associated with the screening of abrasive ores. We also have a range of speciality liner materials, paint specifications and wear prevention compounds which are used to combat the effects of corrosion in the marine and refinery applications. Vibramech even offers the option to install a screen in stainless steel,”explains Massey. Vibramech has developed a proven and comprehensive range of vibrating equipment, including, but not limited to: multislope (or banana) screens, horizontal and inclined screens, dewatering screens, primary & secondary sizing screens, crusher product screens, degrit screens, floats and sinks screens, classifying screens, XRT & X-ray prep screens and feeders, DMS feeders, grizzly feeders, pan feeders, tubular feeders and grease tables. As sound dynamic behaviour is essential to ensure vibrating equipment reliability, all equipment is built to perform within strict dynamic parameters. All internal mating surfaces are machined in order to maintain stringent dimensional tolerances. In addition, the company’s quality assurance programme makes provision for a full 3D vibration analysis to be conducted on all equipment prior to release. This is used as a benchmark for the life of the equipment. All equipment is manufactured in-house by Vibramech, in its factory in Chamdor, 35 km west of Johannesburg. Almost every piece of equipment is tailor-made to suit a client’s specific requirements, from both a plant layout viewpoint and process considerations. A present staff complement of over 200 control all activities from sales through to engineering and manufacturing. All equipment is designed and manufactured by Vibramech without the use of manufacturing subcontractors. This ensures complete control over quality and scheduling. Furthermore, its flexible and practical approach to screen design enables the client to optimise the vibrating equipment geometry to suit its specific requirements, resulting in tailor-made equipment. Vibrator motor and geared exciter repairs form part of Vibramech’s service offering, with repairs conducted to OEM specifications. URAS vibrator motors and geared exciters are part of Vibramech’s key product offering, which, along with other OEM vibrator motors and geared exciters, are repaired at its 25 000 m² facilities. The company has distributed URAS vibrator motors as part of its vibrating equipment product offering since 1981 and is the exclusive URAS vibrator motor distributor for Africa and the Middle East. Vibramech’s field services department continues to service all equipment supplied into the field. It also has established regional offices in eMalahleni and Lephalale to service new and existing clients in the Limpopo and Mpumalanga Provinces. It also has a permanent sales engineer stationed in Letlhakane, Botswana to provide support throughout Botswana. Vibramech is B-BBEE compliant under a SANAS accredited generic scorecard. Please visit Vibramech’s website for an overview on how Vibramech could assist with your current and future mineral processing requirements.