World-leading autonomous solutions specialist RCT has successfully commissioned the premier global mid- tier gold company Evolution Mining’s underground loader fleet with RCT’s proprietary ControlMaster automation technology. The project has transformed Evolution Mining’s underground loader fleet away from its previous teleremote provider in favour of RCT’s fully autonomous technology solution. Read more TECH NEWS RCT installed and commissioned its ControlMaster Guidance Automation solution onto one CAT R2900 underground loader and one CAT R1700 underground loader at the Mungari operation in Western Australia’s Goldfields. RCT supplied two Automation Centres located at designated work zones within the mine which are fitted with G-Dash and provides the operators with real-time, graphical machine data. The project also involved installing a communications network, critical spares parts and a specialised RCT parts cabinet. RCT Business Development Manager Mining Ryan Noden said he is pleased that RCT has continued to build on its existing relationship with Evolution Mining. “RCT’s automation solution was previously established at one of Evolution Mining’s other projects and is now helping the Mungari operation further optimise production capabilities,” says Noden. “We have been working with Evolution Mining for the past few months planning the transition to RCT’s automation solution that will deliver strong productivity gains,” he continues. “Our ControlMaster Guidance Automation technology sets Evolution Mining onto a pathway to full mine digitisation with the ability to scale our technology as the mine develops and introduce the latest technology upgrades when required.” “Mungari will receive on-ground technical support through our branch in Kalgoorlie backed by a team of highly experienced automation specialists.” A spokesperson for Evolution Mining says: “Evolution Mining has seen a dramatic reduction in remote-related machine damage and a huge improvement in operator comfort and workplace enjoyment”. “It’s wonderful to see Evolution Mining providing state-of-the-art facilities for its employees.” RCT will also empower site personnel with comprehensive onsite training packages for machine operators and maintenance personnel.