Kore Potash has announced that following the recent equity fundraise, work has commenced on the Definitive Feasibility Study (DFS) for its DX Project. The Company believes DX is one of the highest grade undeveloped potash deposits known globally, and could potentially have the lowest operating costs per tonne of potassium fertiliser produced of any global peer. In addition to its high grade, additional benefits are provided by the shallow depth of the DX deposit, the close proximity to the coast for shipping to market, and suitability for the solution mining method. Brad Sampson, Chief Executive of Kore Potash, says: “I am very pleased that work on the DX Definitive Feasibility Study has commenced. This is another important milestone towards bringing the DX project into production as a low cost potash producer at a time when demand for potash continues to grow.” “The combination of DX’s high grade and low cost nature is truly unique and we look forward to continuing to move the project forward.”“As we complete the constituent parts of the DFS and beyond, Kore gets closer to constructing its projects. “Whilst this is a several years long endeavour for any mine of this scale, I am confident that we will deliver for shareholders, employees, and all Republic of the Congo stakeholders.” The DFS for DX is divided into two phases. Phase One is focussed on further drilling work to define Measured Mineral Resources and Proved and Probable Ore Reserves for the project along with technical design aspects of the mine. This work will assist the Company’s funding plans and development of DX. The drilling programme for Phase One will consist of up to an additional 5 holes in the deposit and will be carried out utilising Company-owned drill rigs already on site at Sintoukola. The mobilisation of the drilling crew has started, and drilling is due to commence in October 2020. Appointment of international consultants to the DFS CM2E, a local environmental consulting company has been appointed to carry out the environmental work required to commence with the drilling programme. This process has already progressed with the initial public participation meetings having been held. The submission of the final documentation to the authorities is due by the end of September 2020. Kore has a technical services agreement with SQM, one of Kore’s major shareholders. This agreement gives Kore access to a number of key technical experts within SQM to discuss and review aspects of the DFS work and consultants’ recommendations. These discussions have commenced. SQM will also conduct test works within their pilot plant to improve confidence in the estimate of the potassium carrying capacity of the production brine. The consulting group, Agapito Associates Inc (“Agapito”) have been appointed as the Competent Persons for both Mineral Resources (Mr Rick Baars) and Ore Reserves (Dr Michael Hardy) in line with JORC requirements. The appointment of these consultants covers the revision of the Mineral Resource estimate once the drilling has been completed, the design of the mine to a DFS level and the revision of the Ore Reserves on completion of the mine design. The geomechanical core samples that are required for creep and compressive strength test work have arrived at the Agapito offices from the Republic of the Congo. Agapito will commence with the compressive strength testwork and have contracted with Institut Fur Gebirgsmechanick GmbH (IFG) in Germany to carry out the creep testwork. This testwork will be key in the geomechanical modelling to be carried out to evaluate cavern stability during mining. Additional dissolution testwork has also commenced in the Agapito laboratory to determine the ultimate brine concentration when the dissolution rate is zero for differing solvent concentrations. This will allow this key design factor to be determined prior to commencing the mine design work.