The Implats Group has posted record headline earnings on the back of solid operational performances and record sales revenues – despite the considerable impact of COVID-19 – for its full year to 30 June 2020. The Group also declared a final dividend of R4.00 a share, bringing the total dividend for the full year to R5.25 per share. The Implats strategic journey over the past few years has set the Group on a firm footing for long-term sustainability and value creation for all stakeholders. Read more about platinum Gains in productivity, safety and efficiency at Impala Rustenburg resulted in upward revisions to the planned production profile at the operating complex, negating the need for large-scale retrenchments. In Zimbabwe, operations continued to excel despite increasing socioeconomic pressures. The operational turnaround and renewed social stability at Marula were sustained, yielding substantial financial value and, at Two Rivers, a project to increase processing capacity was approved and advanced during the year. Strengthened relationships with key stakeholders were affirmed by a multi-year wage agreement concluded without third-party intervention and a strong environmental performance underpinned the continued commitment to responsible corporate stewardship. Implats’ portfolio was enhanced by the acquisition of Impala Canada, a mechanised, high-margin primary palladium producer, which further diversified the Group’s operating footprint. Implats CEO, Nico Muller, says: “The progress made in the strategic repositioning of Implats over the past several years enabled the Group to successfully navigate the challenges created by the unprecedented external shock of the COVID-19 pandemic. “Operational resilience enabled sustained delivery of refined metal to customers and the Group benefited from robust pricing for primary products, achieving stellar financial results. The Group made meaningful advances in strengthening its balance sheet and dividend payments were reinstated. “This performance would not have been possible without the unwavering support received from our employees and various key external stakeholders throughout the year. “This support was particularly vital on the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, which necessitated unprecedented collaboration and cooperation to ensure that Implats was able to contribute meaningfully to mitigating the devastating effect of the pandemic and deliver sustained value to all our stakeholders.” Financial highlights