Mining investment company Critical Metals, and integrated specialist graphite and graphene producer Tirupati Graphite, have noted their plans to list on the London Stock Exchange. Read more: Castillo Copper lists on the London Stock Exchange Given the challenges that COVID-19 has created, this is a highly positive indication that there is still investment appetite in the London resource market. Critical Metals will be listing and commence trading on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange on Tuesday 29th September under the ticker CRTM, following the publication of its UK Financial Conduct Authority-approved prospectus on Friday, 24 September 2020. Critical Metals is looking to build a profitable mining company by identifying the investment gaps in the small mine market on the continent of Africa, primarily in the critical and strategic metals space where supply/demand fundamentals are forecasted to continue to improve as critical raw metals play an increasingly important role in economic and technological development. The company’s initial focus will be on small-medium known deposits as opposed to exploration, with projects with low entry costs and the potential to generate near term cash flow where other majors have disposed of assets. Critical Metals has raised £800 000 for initial working capital requirements while it seeks out initial investments, which will likely include a majority interest in one or more. Read more: Pensana Rare Earths lists on London Stock Exchange Meanwhile, Tirupati Graphite, a fully-integrated, cash generative, specialist graphite and graphene producer with operations in Madagascar and India, announced its intention on Monday 28 September, to possibly undertake an initial public offering and publish its registration document – which has been submitted to the FCA for approval. The company is considering applying for admission of its ordinary shares to the Official List of the FCA by way of a Standard Listing and to trading on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange. With strong market demand, graphite and graphene are critical sustainable materials as a result of their extensive and unique properties and applications. In support of this, the company places a special emphasis on “green” applications, including renewable energy generation, energy storage and composites, and is committed to ensuring its operations and products are as sustainable as possible.