ASX-listed Minbos Resources has appointed Angolan environmental consultancy Grupo Simples to conduct an environmental impact study and a waste management plan for the Cabinda phosphate project, as part of the company’s ongoing definitive feasibility study. Read more: Minbos Resources: Stimulating agriculture, promoting food security Groupo Simples, which has provided specialist environmental consultancy services in Angola since 2005, will prepare the environmental impact study (EIS) and a waste management plan (WMP) for the Cácata mine and Caio granulation plant based on specialist environmental and social impact assessment (EISA) reports. The submission of the EIS to the Ministry of Culture Tourism and Environment will allow the company to obtain the respective installation environmental license required for construction of the mine and the granulation plant. The WMP constitutes a legal requirement applicable to obtaining the installation environmental licence and therefore sits within the scope of works to be completed by Grupo Simples. Scope of work and terms Work is currently expected to take between six and seven months and is likely to be the critical path for the DFS. Minbos is discussing the extent of previous environmental approvals for the industrial park at Porto de Caio which may reduce the scope of work. Next steps Minbos expects to appoint a specialist consultant to complete the EISA’s for the mine and port in the coming days. This consultant will undertake baseline surveys and impact assessments for both projects covering flora, fauna, air quality, soils, hydrology, and hydrogeology. The baseline surveys will build on previous baseline studies undertaken in 2012 and 2017 and feed into the Grupo Simples EIS submission. The DFS builds on the results of the Cabinda phosphate project scoping study released on 26 August 2020, which demonstrated the project to be technically and financially robust. The +/- 35% scoping study estimated an after tax NPV of between US$159 – 260 million based on a pre-production capital estimate of between US$22 – 28 million.