Vedanta Zinc International (VZI), a grouping of zinc assets located in South Africa; Namibia and Ireland, has announced changes to its Black Mountain Mining (BMM) board with the appointment of Anil Agarwal, Vassi Naidoo and Pushpender Singla. Vedanta Resources Chairman, Anil Agarwal, has joined the BMM board as Chairman of the Board. Agarwal is a metals and mining magnate who turned a small scrap metal business into globally diversified natural resources conglomerate, Vedanta Resources. It is the 6th largest diversified natural resources company with its operations in India, South Africa, Namibia, Zambia and Australia. Read more about base metals “Vedanta is fully committed to expansion of our operations in South Africa. I am looking forward to contributing to this growth journey in partnership with the South African government and to be part of the larger vision that will continue to bring prosperity and transformation in the Northern Cape,” says Agarwal. Vassi Naidoo has taken on the role of Deputy Chairman of the BMM Board. He is currently the Chairman of the Nedbank Group and Nedbank and has previously served as CEO of Deloitte Southern Africa, Vice Chairman of Deloitte UK and Board member of Old Mutual Plc. “I am impressed with VZI’s activities in the Northern Cape that continue to have positive socio-economic ripple effects that extend beyond the mine complex. “I intend to leverage my experience of corporate governance and doing business in emerging economies to further enhance VZI’s vision,” says Naidoo. VZI CFO, Pushpender Singla CA (SA), has also been appointed as Director of the BMM Board. He comes with 15 years of rich global mining experience and has been actively involved in driving VZI strategy since 2015. Furthermore, VZI has also appointed Abiel Mngomezulu, former President and CEO of Mintek, as an Executive Member on its Advisory Committee. Mngomezulu, a trained geologist with a vast background in mineral economics and mineral policy, headed the mineral research organisation for a decade. Prior to that, he was the Deputy Director-General of the Mineral Policy and Promotion Branch and a member of the Mintek Board. “I am very pleased to be part of VZI and looking forward to contributing my experience and knowledge to enable and unlock its growth potential,” says Mngomezulu. “The newly appointed Board and Executive Members bring decades of leadership in various areas that are vital to our future operations and strategy. We are delighted to welcome them to the VZI Family,” says Agarwal.