In January this year Canyon Coal celebrated the opening of a new canteen which is operated by local black, women-owned catering company, Kgaditse Prestige Events, at the Khanye colliery in Bronkhorstspruit. At a cost of about R74 920, Canyon Coal established the fully equipped canteen, comprising a full kitchen and a designated outside area where the employees can enjoy their meals. Canyon Coal procurement manager Carmia Pretorius explained that: “The canteen is a major improvement for Khanye colliery, as there was no dedicated onsite eatery for employees to source meals from.” The establishment of the canteen formed part of an enterprise development initiative, which saw the appointment of Bronkhorstspruit-born and bred business women Angy Kgaditse (24) (pictured above) and Joyce Kgaditse (45), who are the co-directors of Kgaditse Prestige Events (KPE), as the operators of the canteen. The canteen has also created new job opportunities as the kitchen is staffed by three workers hired from the local community. Says Kgaditse: “The convenience factor we provide staff at the mine is a major positive for our business. It is inspiring for us to see that we are adding value to peoples’ lives by making it easier for them to eat healthy meals at work and at home. We are grateful to Canyon Coal for the opportunity they have given us and are committed to, in our own small way, help ensure workers are healthy by supplying them with good, wholesome meals.” Representing local government, City of Tshwane Economic Development Mining Specialist, Thabang Ntshinga commended Canyon Coal for its efforts in supporting local businesses and ensuring that local community members share in the benefits from the mine. “This initiative undertaken by Canyon Coal should serve as an example to other mining companies on how to nurture and support local businesses and economic development in a manner that is mutually beneficial to the community and the company,” she stated. Menar Group social licensing manager Xolile Mankayi explains that: “This enterprise development project aims to provide employees with convenient, affordable, healthy food onsite and empower local community members by supporting them with business development opportunities whenever possible.” He adds that an important part of the mine’s Social and Labour Plan is to ensure that workers are healthy and that business opportunities are given to local community members, and this initiative fulfils both those requirements. Khanye colliery general manager Guy Thompson says: “The opening of the canteen was warmly welcomed by the 385 employees – including contractors of the mine. As the mine has at least 14 years remaining, we look forward to seeing the growth and development of the facility as Khanye continues along its growth path.”