TSXV-listed manganese developer Giyani Metals Corp. has commenced its feasibility study field programme for its K.Hill manganese project in Botswana, with the appointment of a drilling contractor, project management and geological services contractor and their imminent mobilisation. Read more: Giyani Metals Corp. starts feasibility study work at Botswana manganese project The 2020 field programme follows Giyani’s recent successful US$1.2 million capital raising, which closed in 18 September 2020. As part of the field programme, Giyani will undertake an infill drilling programme, with the objective of upgrading the current inferred mineral resources at K.Hill, into the indicated mineral resource category, from which a CIM Code compliant reserve could then be estimated. The drilling programme, which was awarded to Stewardship Drilling, will consist of 90 holes and 2 700 m of reverse circulation drilling, as well as 9 holes and 250 m of diamond core drilling. Stewardship is expected to have fully mobilised to site by mid-October, subject to the current COVID-19 regulations being maintained in Botswana. Stewardship has entered into a drilling contract with Giyani under which Giyani will partly pay the drilling costs through the issue of common shares of the company for 27% of the contract total value. The deemed price per share at which Giyani will make the payment in shares will be at a discount of 25% to the last closing price of the Giyani shares on the TSX Venture Exchange on the trading day immediately prior to Giyani’s subsequent notification to the TSXV, which will occur following invoicing under the contract. The shares will only be issued following completion of the drilling contract. Read more: Giyani secures finance for manganese project The drilling contractor will be supported by the company’s project management and geological services consulting company, Lambda Tau. Samples from the reverse circulation drilling will be collected at 50cm downhole intervals. Appropriate sample sizes will be split and submitted for XRF analysis by Borate Fusion at SGS Laboratories in Johannesburg, South Africa. In addition, samples from the RC drilling as well as the core recovered from the diamond core drilling will be provided to Tetra Tech for hydrometallurgical and comminution lab testing.Geotechnical and geophysical studies will also be undertaken as part of the field programme. The geotechnical study will be led by SRK in Cardiff, UK. Geotechnical sample data will be collected from the drill core as well as outcrops of mineralisation. This data will assist the geotechnical modelling of the deposit, slope stability and the open pit mine design. The geophysical study will use a low frequency ground penetrating radar method. The survey aims to define with greater accuracy the resource estimation. Giyani Metals Corp. CEO Robin Birchall says the operational programme has been designed in such a way that is both effective and economical, by taking advantage of reverse circulation drilling where possible. “This data will strengthen our confidence of the optimum drilling interval across the K.Hill deposit and additional geotechnical work will enable us to produce an optimal pit-shell design,” he adds. “With borders reopening in sub-Saharan Africa, we plan to announce the next phases of the 2020 Field Program in due course,” Birchall concludes.