Despite the fact that Eurasian Resources Group’s operations have been somewhat stymied by the Democratic Republic of Congo’s new Mining Code, CEO Benedikt Sabotka remains firmly committed to socio-economic upliftment in that country and the African continent in general. In addition, he is also champion the cause for responsible mining throughout the battery metals supply chain. Submit a nomination for the 2021 edition of Mining Elites in Africa One of the projects that Sabotka has initiated a blockchain solution on the IBM platform at its Metalkol RTR cobalt mine which is aimed at enhancing traceability in the cobalt supply chain. The solution will help to ensure a responsible supply chain for lithium-ion batteries, including ensuring there is no use of illegal material, child labour and other poor standards. In his efforts to promote a cleaner supply chain, ERG is a founding member of the Global Battery Alliance, a public-private collaboration hosted by the World Economic Forum. Its aim to ensure that battery metals are sourced from in an efficient, transparent and systematic manner. Through his involvement in the Global Battery Alliance, Sobodtka is championing traceability along the supply chain.” Meanwhile, the company is one of the largest corporate social responsibility (CSR) investors in the DRC and Sobotka personally visits communities to ensure that ERG is indeed making a tangible difference. One of the initiatives personally driven by Sobotka is the Bon Pasteur child protection centre in Kolwezi, to take children out of mining and provide free education and other services in the Kanina–Domain Marial artisanal cobalt mining community. A comprehensive facility, the centre provides free education but also other initiatives much beyond this including healthcare, nutrition, counseling and human rights training, as well as an opportunity for families to learn about alternative livelihood opportunities. It will also host the activities of the Bon Pasteur Kolwezi community-based development programme, which is aimed at tackling child labour in artisanal mining communities, once again proving Sobotka’s commitment to uplifting communities in Africa. 