Hitachi ABB Power Grids has pioneered a ground-breaking modular mobile substation solution which vastly reduces the time to restore power in the case of major disruptive events such as natural disasters. This world-first 400 kV multi-voltage modular mobile substation system can be rapidly deployed and in-stalled to restore power from an average duration of 18 months – required for the new build of a convention-al substation – to only seven days. Read more about energy Each mobile substation, equipped with high-voltage hybrid switchgear and protection and control solutions, is compact in design and ready for fast energisation. This game-changing ‘plug and play’ solution contributes to Hitachi ABB Power Grids’ vision of ensuring access to af-fordable, reliable and sustainable energy. Read more TECH NEWS “Wherever you are in the world, access to an affordable, reliable and sustainable source of power is a basic prerequisite for human society and progress,” said Niklas Persson, MD of the Grid Integra-tion Business Unit at Hitachi ABB Power Grids. “Disruptions to energy provision can result in severe con-sequences, which is why we are continuously innovating technologies, such as this modular mobile substa-tion disaster recovery solution, to enable customers to provide stable and competitive sources of power and further reduce carbon emissions,” Niklas added. Safeguarding long-term grid stability and power quality Hitachi ABB Power Grids’ mobile substation concept has been designed to ensure long-term grid stability and power quality to regions particularly prone to unpredictable events and natural disasters such as storms, flooding and earthquakes. Hitachi ABB Power Grids designs and builds the modular solution, providing ongoing preventive maintenance to ensure the equipment is ready 24/7 to replace an existing substation in a rapid timeframe. Hitachi ABB Power Grids’ modular concept for the mobile substations market is highly configurable accord-ing to a customer’s specific needs, which means it can replace different voltage range and standards of the grid. The factory-tested mobile substation unit can be installed and deployed within hours, proving the per-fect solution for utilities and industries that need to quickly provide interim grid connections and temporary power supplies. These modules require no civil works, have reduced site activities, pose lower risks and come in the form of ready-to-connect, complete assemblies that are designed for grid code compliance and easy mobility. They are also an environmentally-friendly solution owing to limited space requirements and easy transporta-tion from warehouse to site on trailers that are part of the modular mobile substation system.