DRDGOLD is considering
re-starting operations at its Far West Gold Recoveries surface retreatment
operation at Carletonville, south-west of Johannesburg, in consultation with
government and organised labour. CEO Niël Pretorius says: “Following the shutdown of operations on 26 March 2020 in terms of South Africa’s national lockdown, DRDGOLD has considered various options to recommence limited operations to sustain infrastructure and soften the impact of the stoppage without exposing employees to increased risk. “Key considerations are
the maintenance of hygiene, social distancing, screening capacity and the
ability to provide medical assistance and isolation in the event of infections. “It is said that South
Africa is lagging international infection trends by approximately two weeks.
Hence, exposure to close-proximity situations – for example, commuting by way
of public transport – is at this stage amongst the most important challenges
informing the decision to start up at sites located in and around the Johannesburg
metropolis.” At FWGR however,
Pretorius says, social distancing associated with the commute is not nearly as
complex. “It is a much smaller
footprint with employees living much closer to the operations. This situation,
coupled with all the other preventative protocols in place, means the FWGR
working environment poses a considerably lower risk of infection than, for
example, the workspace of those involved in retail and public transport.” Chapter 2, section 11A
and Annexure B, section B.22 of the Disaster Management Act Regulations issued
by the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA)
define gold mining and refining as essential services, exempt from the
restrictions imposed by the lockdown announcement. “However, to move simply
on a technical interpretation of the Act would be folly and for management to
assume exclusive responsibility for the sustaining of health, jobs, social
capital, the environment and the economy would be inappropriate in these
circumstances,” Pretorius says. “This situation poses a
challenge unlike anything any of us has ever experienced. Taking hard decisions
is the essence of management, and invariably requires the weighing up of
conflicting interests and finding a compromise of sorts. This time there is no
balancing act – this situation requires that we defy the laws of physics, in
that it forbids any compromise on the side of health and safety. “We have studied the
guidelines to reduce the risk of infection and we have implemented protocols in
terms of hygiene and social distancing which will allow us to responsibly
conduct limited production at FWGR. “We have briefed our
employees of the situation and have called for volunteers to resume work. We
are encouraged that there are more volunteers than required at this stage –
only 60% of the typical shift complement will be deployed at any given point in
time.” A shared
responsibility Pretorius says the
situation and its implications pose a burden beyond that which management could
reasonably be expected to carry by itself. “The State, as the
representative will of the people of the country, and organised labour as the
voice of its members, share this responsibility. “Consequently, we wrote
to the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE), explaining the
situation and requesting its endorsement. This afternoon we had a very
constructive telephone engagement with the Department in which several specific
issues were discussed in terms of assurances required and the content of
protocols. This conversation has paved the way for the limited resumption of
reclamation activities, and we will build on it in the next few days. “We have also written to
organised labour, NUM and AMCU, and have invited their nominated
representatives to attend a presentation on the details of the deployment of
staff, the risk protocols that are in place and the support offered to
employees who present with symptoms of infection. We have also offered to take
them on a site tour at FWGR to show exactly what has been put in place to
manage the risk of infection. “We are confident that,
in the spirit of collaboration and solidarity called for by South Africa’s
President, we will receive the support we have requested.” Addressing human
hardship Turning to DRDGOLD’s
societal role in the face of the pandemic, Pretorius says the company operates
closer to visible human hardship than most entities in South Africa. “We re-process mine dumps
for gold. The communities living in proximity to our operations are amongst the
poorest of the poor, as a result of which a large part of our social investment
is focused on poverty alleviation. “Many individuals in
these communities live on a per-day economic cycle, performing odd jobs and
making only enough money for one day’s food. They are the people hardest hit by
the lockdown. “We have therefore
entered into an arrangement with Umsizi Sustainable Social Solutions, through a
collaboration called Impophomo, to bring relief to these communities. DRDGOLD
has made an initial seed investment of R200 000 in this initiative, and private
funding of a further R100 000 has also been secured. “This will be applied
directly to addressing the immediate needs of certain target communities in
Johannesburg, Ekurhuleni and Merafong, leveraging the footprint that we
established through our small-scale urban farming initiative in which upwards
of 2 000 families participate. Impophomo will also seek to collaborate with
social services and other NGOs in the target areas to bring relief. “In Carletonville, the
staff of FWGR joined forces with SAVF, a family care organisation, to provide
much- needed soap, sanitizers and blankets. Security personnel at both
operations have been asked to keep their eyes peeled for instances of hardship,
which we will try to address through Impophomo. “DRDGOLD has also
purchased 35 high-care beds at a total cost of R600 000 in a programme launched
by the South African Medical and Education (SAME) Foundation forwards that are
being set up for COVID-10 patients at the Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital in
Soweto, Johannesburg.” Preserving the business In closing, Pretorius
flags the importance of DRDGOLD preserving its business by carefully and
intelligently managing the impacts of COVID-19. “We are working flat-out
to find a solution for the logistical challenges at the Johannesburg-based
operations. Many employees there make use of own transport and the commuting
service owned and operated by organised labour which we
set up several years ago could also feature in providing the desired outcome.
We hope to have bedded down a plan in this regard early next week. “There is a lot at stake
– the safety and health of our employees and society, employees’ jobs, the
savings of hundreds of investors, the South African economy and, ultimately,
social stability. “By taking the right
decisions at the right time based on solid data, we give ourselves the best
chance as a nation of staying on our feet through this crisis. It is the worst
possible time for indecision through fear or for political posturing. Ideology
and ambition should, just for a short time, play second fiddle to national
consensus, collaboration and resolve. “We are hopeful of continued support from the DMRE and organised labour.”