Ivanhoe Mines has announced that, given the fast-evolving global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is providing details on protective measures implemented while ensuring business continuity at the Kamoa-Kakula Project. In response to
government-imposed travel restrictions and emergency protocols being introduced
worldwide, strict quarantine and lock-down procedures have been implemented at
all three of the company’s projects ─ Kamoa-Kakula, Platreef and Kipushi ─ to
prevent the virus from spreading to the minesites. To date, no COVID-19
cases have been discovered. At Kamoa-Kakula, the
minesite has been locked down and all key personnel is on site, except for the
supply of food and critical equipment under strict delivery protocols. A total of 881 employees,
who were previously based in surrounding communities and Kolwezi, have been
moved to permanent minesite accommodation, and up to 250 additional employees
will be moved to the minesite once accommodations have been expanded and
subject to appropriate and stringent quarantine protocols. At present, a total of
3,532 employees and contractors are based at the minesite, which ensures
operational continuity and minimizes the impact on the development schedule. Platreef has suspended
its shaft-sinking operations until at least April 16th in compliance with the
21-day, country-wide lock down imposed by the South African Government
effective 26 March. The project is
maintaining a small workforce to conduct care and maintenance activities in
order to have the operation ready for when project development resumes. Kipushi also has suspended
operations in order to reduce the risk to the workforce and local communities.
The project is maintaining a small workforce to conduct care and maintenance
activities, and to maintain pumping operations. Following the guidelines
outlined by the World Health Organization, while drawing on the experience of
its China-based partners – CITIC Metal and Zijin Mining – and well before the
situation was declared a pandemic, the company appointed a task team from
senior management with overall responsibility for COVID-19 response planning. The team is led by Dr.
Nicolette Du Plessis, a specialist in Paediatric Infectious Diseases and a
Professor at the University of Pretoria, and includes specialist doctors,
paramedics, nurses, as well as counsel from several external, world-leading
epidemiologists. Dr. Du Plessis is president of the Southern African Society of Paediatric Infectious Diseases and president-elect of the Federation of Infectious Diseases Societies of Southern Africa. Read more about Ivanhoe Mines The task team, together
with its 16-strong and expanding, on site Kamoa-Kakula Project medical response
team and its medical service provider, Medical Support Solutions of the United
Kingdom, has access to some of the best advice from medical experts from around
the globe and has implemented key procedures across the business to ensure
minimal disruption to its operations. At the Kamoa-Kakula
Project, the company has implemented strict isolation procedures in the event
of higher risk personnel or potential COVID-19 cases. Ten intensive care units,
each equipped with a ventilator, and 20 high-care units will be available to
treat potential patients, in addition to a quarantine facility for up to 60
potential patients. The company already has
procured abundant critical protective supplies for its minesite medical
professionals, including surgical gloves and N95 face masks. In addition,
Ivanhoe’s largest shareholder, CITIC Metal, has assisted with the procurement
of a very substantial number of coronavirus diagnostic test kits. The company will distribute the test kits to its projects in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and South Africa to enforce its health and safety protocols during the pandemic and to ensure business continuity at the Kamoa-Kakula Project. Read more about mining in central Africa In addition, the company
is working closely with its host governments, which have acted swiftly and
decisively in legislating measures to curb the spread of the disease. Together with the DRC and
South African Ministries of Health, the company is sourcing several early-stage
treatments that could potentially prevent a country-wide outbreak of the
COVID-19 virus. Co-chairman Robert
Friedland says: “We are taking action to
support our employees and communities as the COVID-19 situation evolves. Our
aim is to keep our operations running safely, and we are monitoring the
situation closely.” “The nature of our mine
development projects is such that certain work cannot be done remotely, so our
focus is on reducing the risk of the virus spreading to our projects. “Operational continuity
is critical for jobs, the communities around our operations, and the local
economies. We will continue to adapt our response as this situation evolves,
with our primary focus being the health and safety of our people.” “The Ivanhoe team is
comprised of an extraordinary group of people. I have absolute confidence that
working together we will meet these challenges and emerge stronger and more
resilient than ever,” adds Friedland. Underground development
at the Kakula Copper Mine continues to advance at a rapid pace. Approximately
12 kilometres of underground development now is complete, which is roughly 3.4
kilometres ahead of plan. In March, the mining team
set another new monthly development record of more than 1,350 metres − more
than 330 metres ahead of plan for the month. A second owner’s crew,
comprised of local Congolese miners who were fully trained on site, has begun
underground development work as the project transitions towards an all-owner
mining team. Construction of Kakula’s
3.8 Mtpa surface processing plant is advancing rapidly. Initial civil
construction has prioritized the run-of-mine stockpiles and ball mills
foundation. The Kamoa-Kakula Project
sources materials and equipment from companies with manufacturing facilities
located in various countries around the globe, some of which have operations
impacted by COVID-19. The engineering team is assessing the impact on the procurement schedule, as well as reduced site activity, on the overall development schedule. Read more about Ivanhoe Mines