The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) and Harmony Gold have agreed that workers in all of Harmony Gold operations in South Africa will be go back to work on 2 May. The statement from NUM continues to say: Harmony Gold has agreed to pay workers their salaries during the lockdown period. The parties agreed that intensive screening will be done to test everyone for COVID-19 when they come back to work. Those who are found to be positive will immediately be isolated and those who are sick will be sent to hospitals. Harmony Gold has committed that stringent measures will be put in place in all its operations in South Africa to ensure that the health and safety of all workers. The NUM Health and Safety structures and management at Harmony Gold operations will be part of the task teams to assess and monitor to see if the company is adhering to the Health and Safety standards when all workers are back at work. The two parties agreed that the Health and Safety of the workers comes first and will not be compromised. The company has committed to roll out a massive education programme about the virus when all workers are back at work. Harmony said all its health workers are properly trained and are ready to deal with the virus. NUM told the company that it must make sure that all its health workers have fitness certificates to make sure that they are regularly tested for the virus. Sanitisers and masks will be available to all employees 24 hours 7 days a week. Social distancing will also be strictly observed when workers will be working. The company also informed the NUM that body scanners have been secured and arrived from China. They will be able to scan temperatures of 30 employees at the same time. Read more about COVID-19 Harmony Gold also revealed during the meeting that as part of fighting the Coronavirus in all its operations it is testing a new product that will be used as a broad-spectrum disinfectant in buses, lifts and cages. Read more about Harmony Gold operations