Africa-focused gold miner Resolute Mining has committed more than US$1 million to support African host governments in their response efforts to combat the coronavirus pandemic. Resolute’s commitments consist of direct financial assistance as well as the sourcing and supply of vitally important personal protective equipment (PPE), COVID-19 testing kits, and other medical equipment. READ MORE: Resolute Mining recognised as Excellence in Gold runner up in Mining Elites in Africa 2020 The significant contributions to the Special COVID-19 Funds set up by the Mali government and the Senegal government builds on Resolute’s ongoing contribution of medical services and supplies to the communities surrounding its Syama gold mine in Mali and its Mako gold mine in Senegal. Resolute has implemented a comprehensive, company-wide response to
COVID-19. This response prioritises the health, safety and well-being of
Resolute employees, contractors and stakeholders while recognising the company’s
responsibility to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of its
operations. Moreover, the company has taken a series of immediate actions,
including implementing the World Health Organization guidelines for separation,
isolation and mitigation at all company sites. Resolute continues to assess developments and update the company’s
response as required. Resolute has no confirmed cases of COVID-19 at any of its
sites or offices, and with supply chains largely unaffected and a dedicated
team in place will continue to maintain safe operations at Syama and Mako. “Extraordinary events require an
extraordinary response,” says Resolute Mining MD and CEO John Welborn. Resolute
is proud to assist Mali and Senegal in the fight against COVID-19. The
challenges presented by COVID-19 continue to change daily and we must remain
agile and united in our response to the pandemic. “Resolute will continue to work closely with our host governments and local communities to keep people safe and maintain our operational capacity. We recognise that the continued operation of Syama and Mako during this crisis is of vital importance to local employment, community well-being and the economies of Mali and Senegal,” Welborn concludes.