Mining software solutions provider MICROMINE has launched a new pay-as-you-go subscription model for African clients to keep pace with industry need. The Australian-headquartered
company, with a regional office based in Johannesburg, offers software
solutions that span the mining lifecycle – from geological exploration and data
management to resource estimation, 3D mine design, planning and production control
– will make the change from contract-based licensing to subscription later this
month. The struggle smaller African companies have faced is getting enough investment into their operations. Thus, creating a spending dilemma on operational costs vs technology costs, with the former usually taking preference. With the new subscription model, spending on exploration and modelling software will become a more flexible choice due to the different options available to the customer. MICROMINE Global Marketing Manager,
Kate Gilbey, said the change was in direct response to industry feedback, with
client’s reporting they wanted the flexibility to use the industry-leading
software as and when they needed. “It’s no longer a matter of whether individuals and companies want to go digital, as it was when we started our business more than 30 years ago, it’s now a matter of how, where and when they want to digitalise their activities, so MICROMINE is keeping pace with that change,” Gilbey said. “The move from contract-based licensing agreements to a subscription model reflects a transition we’ve seen across many media and software-based industries, including on-demand television, online music streaming and computer operating systems. “Consumers no longer want
to buy software and services outright, they want the flexibility and
convenience to use services and systems as and when they need,” she added. “For small to medium
explorers in Africa, for whom traditional one-off purchases were
cost-prohibitive, MICROMINE’s new offering alleviates that need to find the
capital to invest in software upfront, and they can choose the subscription
period they need. “For larger clients, who
purchase many licenses, they benefit from a lower initial cost and the ability
to offset the costs over a number of years, as well as an ability to change
their licensing arrangements and software choices as their needs change and
projects evolve from exploration through to full production.” MICROMINE’s subscription
model for new African clients will come into effect in April 2020, as part of a
broader rollout globally. Clients can choose from daily, monthly and yearly subscriptions across four software bundles: Once the license is activated, clients have access to MICROMINE’s user forum and global licensing support five days a week. The subscription-based licensing will be available for new and existing Africa-based clients as part of the global rollout. Related articles:MICROMINE hits back at COVID-19 with free softwareGeologists move away from paper logging to technologyService Pack 2 for MICROMINE 2020 available for downloadUnderstanding the value of your drillhole databaseMICROMINE strengthens data management solution with Geobank 2020Micromine 2020: Forward-thinking digital mine design modelling About MICROMINE: MICROMINE is a leading
provider of intuitive software solutions for the exploration and mining sector,
which is headquartered in Perth, Western Australia. MICROMINE’s integrated
suite of solutions covers the entire mining process, from exploration through
to mine production. MICROMINE understands the
software and consultancy needs of operations around the world. Located in the
world’s major mineral producing capitals, our teams are close to clients’
operations. This means MICROMINE can provide local support in the client’s own
language and time zone. For more information: Kate GilbeyGlobal Marketing ManagerP: +61 (0)8 9423 9000 Craig SternslowMarketing Coordinator – AfricaP: +27 (0)60 980 1745 Visit MICROMINE here