Approval for limited mining and processing at the South Africa operations have been received, subject to the implementation of agreed protocols to address COVID-19 related health and safety risks. These actions in South Africa follow an earlier decision to defer non-essential growth capital expenditure at its US PGM operations in order to reduce personnel numbers in compliance with local health and safety requirements. President
Ramaphosa’s recent plea for additional support in the national fight against COVID-19,
as well as the financial commitment made by the South African President, Deputy
President, Minister and Deputy Ministers to donate a third of their salaries
for the next three months to the Solidarity fund. This
fund has been specifically established to cushion the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on the most vulnerable members of society in South Africa. In
support of the President’s call for unified action and in solidarity with our
employees and other South African’s during this difficult time, the Board and
Executive Management of Sibanye-Stillwater have therefore unanimously elected
to contribute a third of their remuneration for the next three months to the
national Solidarity fund. Sibanye-Stillwater
is a global precious metals company with a significant presence in South Africa
where it provides employment to over 80,000 people and makes a significant
contribution to the South African economy. Not only does the Group play a vital role as a significant employer in the regions in which it operates in the United States and in Southern Africa it also provides critical support to local communities, businesses and regional economies. Read more about COVID-19 The
safety, health and wellbeing of its employees, contractors and communities is the
company’s primary concern and every effort continues to be made to identify and
minimise the risks posed by COVID-19 to employees and contractors. Sibanye-Stillwater
is however mindful of the critical support it provides for thousands of
employees and their families, communities and small businesses as well as the
essential financial contribution it makes to both regional and national
economies. In this regard, Sibanye-Stillwater continues to engage with all stakeholders on ways to minimise impact on South African economy and ensure our sustainable contribution to the economy.