Centamin has announced the appointment of Martin Horgan as CEO and Director of the Company, effective 6 April 2020. Martin is a qualified
mining engineer with 25-years’ experience in multiple areas of the mining
industry. In his career he has
shown a strong strategic and operating acumen as well as demonstrating a
longstanding commitment to environmental and social responsibility within
mining, which is central to Centamin’s decision-making and corporate strategy. From 2009 to 2019 Martin
was the Co-Founder and CEO of Toro Gold, where he oversaw the discovery,
development and operation of the Mako Gold Mine in Senegal. Toro was acquired by LSE and ASX listed Resolute Mining in August 2019. Prior to founding Toro, Martin was Executive Director of BDI Mining, an AIM listed diamond producer, and from 2000 to 2006 he worked in mining finance at Barclays Capital in London, where his responsibilities included technical appraisal and advisory services across Africa and the Middle East. Read more about mining in North Africa He also held consulting engineer roles with SRK and started his career as a mining engineer with Gold Fields of South Africa. Martin will succeed
interim CEO, Ross Jerrard, allowing Ross to focus on his role and
responsibilities as CFO. The Board will work
closely with Martin to ensure a smooth transition and collectively agree a plan
to further strengthen the business and deliver on the opportunities for growth
that lie ahead. In line with ongoing
organisational restructuring the General Manager of Sukari will report directly
to the CEO, with Jeremy Langford resigning from his position as COO to pursue
other interests. The Board would like to
thank Jeremy for his contribution and commitment and wishes him well in his
future endeavours. These changes represent
further steps in reshaping and strengthening the Company’s leadership team,
with a balance of core skills and experience best suited to deliver sustainable
stakeholder returns. Josef El-Raghy, Chairman,
comments: “Appointing someone
of Martin’s calibre follows an intensive international search process and will
enable Centamin to move forward with confidence. “Martin brings not only
excellent technical, commercial and financial experience but also strong
operational and leadership skills which he demonstrated as CEO at Toro Gold. “Combined with his deep
knowledge and understanding of gold mining across Africa, we believe that he
will make an invaluable contribution to the Company. On behalf of the Board, I
would like to thank Ross for his commitment and professionalism in taking on
the role as interim CEO. “Ross has provided
excellent leadership, keeping Centamin focused during challenging
circumstances, as we navigated an unsolicited corporate approach and the
ongoing coronavirus pandemic.” Martin Horgan, CEO
comments: “I am excited to be given the opportunity to lead Centamin at this important stage in its development. The Sukari mine is a world class operation that will continue to underpin the future prospects of the Company, while at the same time pursuing the development of the growth options, as we seek to build a multi-asset gold producer. “I am very much looking forward to working with the management team and the Board to deliver the full potential of the Company for all our shareholders, stakeholders and partners.”