By the end of August 2019, Kangra achieved 2 319 611 Fatality Free operating work hours having received recognition from the Mine Health and Safety Council for achieving over one million and now two million fatality free hours, enthuses Kangra Safety Lead Michael Madonsela. He attributes the mine’s safety
success to management taking a hands-on approach, everyone taking care of one
another and all workers taking ownership for their actions. Michael started working at Kangra
in 2002 as a General Worker before leaving the mine in 2007. He returned to the
mine in 2010 and was appointed as a Safety Officer. In January 2014, he was
promoted to Safety Lead and has been holding the position for the past five
years now. He notes that since Canyon Coal acquired Kangra in September 2018, there has been a ‘New Beginning’ in terms of the focus on health and safety at the mine. Programmes that have been implemented and reinforced to facilitate the improved safety standard include mandatory daily safety briefings, Visible Felt Leadership (VFL) programmes and monthly Health, Safety, Security, Community and Environmental evaluations of safety performance, and paying special attention to the needs of all workers by providing guidance and support – when required. Related articles: Kangra Coal: New reserve brings new life in South AfricaKangra Coal hands over R300 000 community hall in MpumalangaKangra Coal New Beginnings! Michael is supported by a team of
safety staff, who conduct safety audits to ensure compliance with safety
regulations for the whole of Kangra, particularly in the opencast section, as
well as underground operations, which comprise of three continuous miner
sections. Zero Harm and Festive Season
Focus “We are dedicated to achieving
the Zero Harm goal because one injury is already one too many. The goal will
always be to stay fatality free and to continuously eliminate all injuries.” “With the festive season, or as
we like to call it the silly season, fast approaching, a lot of focus has been
placed on people’s wellness. We have launched a wellness campaign that seeks to
highlight the importance of maintaining a healthy lifestyle. As we believe ‘A
healthy employee is a safer employee’,” Michael concludes.