Due to the current status of the global COVID-19 virus and the ban applied on mass gatherings by the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Clarion Events Africa (formerly Spintelligent) is rescheduling DRC Mining Week. The event, which was due to take place from 17-19 June, will now run from 7-9 October 2020. The venue – The Pullman Grand Karavia Hotel in Lubumbashi, DRC – remains unchanged. DRC Mining Week, on its 16th edition, will attract over 5,000 local and international mining stakeholders and influencers from across public and private sectors, doing business in the DRC and is recognised as the largest, B2B mining expo in the country. “The health and safety of our exhibitors, visitors,
employees and the wider public is of paramount importance to us,” says managing director David Ashdown. “We have been closely monitoring the spread of the
COVID-19 virus around the globe, and into Africa and we wish all of our
customers well during this challenging time. We take this decision with the
full support and commitment of our key stakeholders and partners. We have given
the maximum term to the opportunity to continue with the event in June as the
project drives vital revenues for suppliers and mining operators, so important
to all stakeholders at this time. However, now is the time to postpone and we
do it with confidence that in October we can deliver an event of equal quality
and value to the industry sector.” Support from partners
Many
of the South African exhibitors at DRC Mining Week are members of the South
African Capital Equipment Export Council (SACEEC). Mr Eric Bruggeman, CEO of
SACEEC and DRC Mining Week event ambassador says: “given the current
uncertainty about the duration of the pandemic, we support the move of all
events to the second half of 2020. SACEEC will fully support Clarion Events in
every possible way to ensure that the shows and exhibitions are successful.” Standard Bank is the Diamond
Plus sponsor of the 2020 edition. Amedeo Anniciello, Chief Executive of
Standard Bank in the DRC comments: “as we navigate the evolving situation
concerning the spread of the virus, we are informed by the need to assertively
safeguard the health and safety of our workplace, staff, clients and the
communities in which we operate. Following this guidance, we fully support
Clarion Events Spintelligent in its decision to postpone the DRC Mining Week
Conference and Exhibition to October 2020”. John Nsana Kanyoni, Vice-President of the Chamber of
Mines in the DRC adds: “I support your decision to postpone the event given
that the Covid-19 pandemic has affected our country. We hope to see you in the
coming months for DRC Mining Week; an essential meeting point for the economy
of the country”. DRC Mining Week is organised by Clarion Events Africa, a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Other well-known events by Clarion Events Africa include African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa, Africa Mining Forum, Nigeria Mining Week, Future Energy East Africa and Future Energy Nigeria. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group.  Websites:  https://www.drcminingweek.com/ http://www.clarioneventsafrica.com/ Media contact:
Senior communications manager: Annemarie
Roodbol
Office: +27 21 700 3558
Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com