With the announcement by President Cyril Ramaphosa that a national state of disaster has been declared in terms of the Disaster Management Act, 2002, industries across the country began embarking on an integrated and coordinated approach to prevent and reduce the further outbreak of COVID-19. The mining sector and mining companies are under a legal obligation to create and maintain a safe working environment for mine workers, and must determine what this declaration means for them. Under the Workplace Preparedness: COVID – 19 (SARS-CoV-19 virus) as released by the Department of Employment and Labour, mine workers are likely to be considered a medium exposure risk threshold. This category includes jobs where there is frequent and/or close contact (within 2 meters) of people who may be infected with the virus, but who are not known or suspected to be COVID-19 patients. Employers must implement measures
that will assist in combating and preventing an outbreak amongst its employees. In addition, the Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 (OSHA) requires that an employer, as far as is reasonably practicable, must provide and maintain a working environment that is safe and without risks to the health of its employees. This includes taking steps to eliminate or mitigate any hazard or potential hazard. In order to implement control measures, an
employer’s existing risk assessment must be reviewed and updated taking into
account the new hazards posed by exposure to COVID-19 in the workplace. More specifically focused on mines is the Mine Health and Safety Act, 1996 (MHSA) which, like the OHSA, requires employers of mines to ensure, as far as reasonably practicable, that the mine is designed, constructed and equipped to provide conditions for safe operation and a healthy working environment, with a communication system and equipment necessary to achieve these conditions. The employer is further required to, as much as possible, ensure that the mine is operated in a way that employees can perform their work without endangering their own, or other persons’ health or safety. The MHSA places a duty on every employer to identify hazards to health or safety which employees may be exposed to at work and to assess the risks, record them and make the records available to employees. In light of the developing COVID-19 situation and the legislative and regulatory implications in the mining sector, the following practical suggestions for mines could help navigate these uncertain times: Read more about COVID-19 There is a further duty on the employer to consult with the mine’s health and safety committee and to determine, and then implement, all measures necessary to eliminate, control, minimise and monitor the risk and to ensure the health and safety of all mine workers in the industry. AUTHORS: Lili Nupen, Nicole Limberis-Ritchie and Chantal Murdock of Nupen Staude de Vries Inc.