Employees from TSX-listed gold miner Endeavour Mining, which previously tested positive for COVID-19, have successfully recovered, with no new cases reported. Since the onset of the pandemic, governments in the regions of West Africa, where Endeavour Mining operates, have acted decisively to implement appropriate response measures, leveraging their recent experience with Ebola. Endeavour has been supporting the national response in close collaboration with the health authorities in its host countries of Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, and Mali. The company’s first response was to quickly mobilise and send to West Africa an expert medical response team. Through this measure, Endeavour was able to work closely with government authorities to identify the priorities and act quickly. Learn more about COVID-19 Endeavour’s efforts leverage its global supply chain, health and safety systems, community relations and communication teams, and notably include the provision of medical equipment and supplies to local communities, such as masks, gloves and cleaning equipment, training dozens of local health workers and running COVID-19 awareness campaigns. Endeavour will continue to provide these essential supplies and services for the duration of the pandemic to support the healthcare centers in its local communities. Endeavour donates to fight against COVID-19 In order to do more, Endeavour’s President & CEO, Sébastien de Montessus is donating 30% of his base salary, and members of the leadership team and the board of directors have also volunteered to donate a portion of their salaries or fees for the next three months. Endeavour will match these funds, resulting in a total donation of approximately US$1 million. The funds will be deployed by Endeavour’s community relations and medical teams to source much needed medical equipment for local community health centers and to also provide financial support to families and schools who have been impacted by a loss of income due to COVID-19. These donations, combined with the amount already spent at the mines and supporting national and local efforts in Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, and Mali will bring Endeavour’s total contribution to $6 million. “The world is currently facing an unprecedented challenge fighting COVID-19 and dealing with the economic, social and health consequences that have arisen,” says De Montessus. “Beyond financial aid, we have leveraged our global supply chain, broader network and medical expertise to obtain key medical supplies to bolster the national authorities’ response across Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso and Mali,” he adds. De Montessus thanked the healthcare professionals on the frontline for their outstanding and selfless work under very difficult circumstances as well as the company’s directors and employees who have contributed both financially and by supporting the implementation of the company’s business continuity programme. Each of the company’s operations are continuing to operate at normal levels with gold shipments and sales continuing, albeit with increased health and safety measures designed to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The operations are continuing to manage and respond to COVID-19 within the framework of the company’s incident management and response plan, which is being monitored by an epidemiologist special advisor to Endeavour.