Schauenburg Systems has established a new cap-lamp production facility at its head office facility in Kempton Park. This facility was created in order to meet the requirements of the Mining Charter to increase local content of products and reduce reliance on imports. The production setup has been designed from scratch to allow maximum productivity. A positive effect was also the creation of more than 10 jobs as well as significantly increasing demand for locally sourced parts from third parties in South Africa. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 3, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here There are two main products that are produced in the facility – the
Schaulicht OptiLite and the Schaulicht SmartLite, both locally designed and industrially
scaled-up.  These cap-lamps have passed
all SANS 1438 tests and have been approved by the DMR. The benefits of both new cap-lamp models produced in this new facility: The Schauenburg Schaulicht cap-lamp models include a number of optional
upgrades for both product ranges, namely: collision avoidance integration, personnel
tracking, asset management and control, trapped miner location paging, real
time communication, early warning gas detection (when combined with
Schauenburg’s GDI Virocap gas warning device) as well as the ability to communicate
real-time gas readings with Schauenburg’s GDI Sentinel gas detection
instrument. Further to these functions and optional extras, the Schauenburg
Schaulicht next generation cap-lamp will launch additional features and
benefits in mid-2020, namely: an updated display, tri-colour warning LED,
direct charging capabilities, time and battery charge display, battery status
monitoring as well as ambient temperature downloading that is downloadable with
the MIMACS system. “These new cap-lamps have in the meantime already been in operational
use with a number of major mining houses. We are looking forward to increasing
our market presence and production capacity in the future with these proudly
South African products both in South Africa as well as all over Africa,” says Martin
Marais, director for sales and business development. As these cap-lamps are the heart of our communication system for
improved safety and connectedness on the mines, Schauenburg made sure that that
they are designed according to the latest requirements in the digital
transformation that is on-going. “Our brand promise of innovation that saves drives us to further develop products that save lives and increase productivity. Our recently launched SCAS Artificial Intelligence (AI) Camera is a great example of our innovative track record. “Processes throughout the value chain certainly will become more digital, but our customer service will stay highly personal in line with our customer-centric culture”, states Dieter Kovar, CEO of the Schauenburg Group in Africa.