Kore Potash, the Republic of Congo focused junior, has been issued its Certificates of Environmental Compliance for its flagship 97%-owned Sintoukola potash project. The certificates were
issued on 31 March 2020 by the Ministry of Tourism and Environment of the
Republic of Congo, each with a 25-year validity and relate to the Environmental
and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for both the Dougou and Kola mining
licences and relax the previous requirement for periodic compliance
certificates. The ESIA for the Kola mining licence
was first approved by the Minister of Tourism and Environment of the Republic
of Congo on 10 October 2013 and required annual re-approval until construction
of a mine on the licence commences. The ESIA was subsequently
re-approved in 2014 for 3 years until 10 October 2017. During 2018 and 2019 the Kola ESIA
was amended to include the full scope described in the definitive feasibility
study for the project. On 31 March 2020, the Minister of Tourism and Environment of the Republic of Congo granted a 25-year approval of the ESIA, in accordance with the provisions of the Mining Convention formed between the government of the Republic of Congo and Kore Potash. READ MORE about the latest developments at Kore Potash The approved Kola ESIA covers the
planned mining and processing of the Kola sylvinite deposit, in line with the
scope of the Kola definitive feasibility study including: The ESIA for the Dougou mining
licence was first approved by the Minister of Tourism and Environment of the
Republic of Congo on 13 July 2018. This ESIA approval was valid for one year
and required annual re-approval until construction of a mine on the licence
begins. On 31 March 2020, the Minister of
Tourism and Environment of the Republic of Congo granted a 25-year approval of
the ESIA, thus aligning with the provisions of the Mining Convention. Approval of an ESIA is a
prerequisite to beginning construction of a mining project in the Republic of
Congo. The ESIA approval currently covers
the potential mining and processing of the Dougou carnallite deposit. The company plans in the future to
seek approval for amendments to this ESIA to include planned mining and processing
of the DX sylvinite deposit which sits within the Dougou mining licence. The company
also plans to utilise the high-voltage power line, gas pipeline and conveyor
and service road corridors, approved in the Kola ESIA, as service corridors for
the DX project. Kore Potash anticipates completion
of the preliminary feasibility study (PFS) on the DX project this quarter. DX presents the quickest pathway to
potash production and cash generation for the company and the larger Kola
project is planned for development subsequent to first production from DX. “As we progress the
development of the DX project and move towards first potash production we will
apply for amendments to the Dougou ESIA as part of the DX permitting process,”
says Kore Potash CE Brad Sampson. “We are particularly mindful of the government’s support during the difficult current global situation with COVID-19.”