Roxgold reports its
preliminary production results for the first quarter of 2020 from the its
Yaramoko Mine Complex located in Burkina Faso. “Yaramoko continues to
operate well with a strong quarter to start the year with tonnage and grades
ahead of expectations,” says Roxgold President and CEO John Dorward. “During these challenging
times, we continue to prioritize the health and safety of our workforce and
local communities. “Mining and production
activities have continued uninterrupted, which is a testament to the dedication
and fortitude of our team at site. “As a company, we remain
confident that we can effectively navigate and respond to this rapidly evolving
pandemic. “The Yaramoko operation
has bolstered its safeguards and risk mitigation efforts to limit the impacts of
the virus, while the company has strengthened its liquidity position in order
to minimize the exposure to operating and financial risks in the market. “Looking ahead, we are
eagerly anticipating the release of the Séguéla Gold Project PEA shortly and
look forward to highlighting the details of what we believe will be Roxgold’s
second cornerstone asset.” Operating summary The Yaramoko Mine Complex
produced 32,380 ounces, based on processing 125,879 tonnes at an average grade
of 8.7 grams per tonne and average mill recoveries of 97.9%. Mining activities
continued to see strong ore production with a total of 134,472 tonnes of ore
mined and 1,453 metres of development. Decline development in the 55 Zone has
now reached the 4754 level, which is approximately 560 metres below surface,
with increased ore drive development. Ore development at
Bagassi South has commenced on the 5095 level, which is approximately 220
metres below surface, while the decline continues to advance as planned. Good
progress on ore development has seen the Bagassi South mine largely developed,
providing additional stoping access for the remainder of the year. The processing plant
availability was 96.4% in the quarter and reported an average throughput rate
of 1,383 tonnes per day exceeding nameplate capacity by approximately 26%. Average throughput was
lower in the quarter due to a planned 39-hour mill shut down for a complete
mill relining. Gold ounces sold of 30,126 ounces were lower than production due
to the timing of gold shipments at the end of the quarter. Update on COVID-19
response Management of the current
global COVID-19 crisis is ongoing. Operations at Yaramoko currently remain
unaffected with heightened preventative measures and response plans in place to
mitigate and minimize any potential impacts from the virus. The Company is
continually assessing the health and safety risks to the Company’s personnel
and contractors at its operations and offices. On the 22 March 2020, the Company announced that two contractors at the Yaramoko mine in Burkina Faso tested positive for COVID-19. Both cases experienced only mild symptoms and have now recovered. Read more about COVID-19 Additionally, a majority
of the previously isolated workers who were identified via contact-tracing have
returned to the workforce after completing their prescribed isolation periods
and testing. The Company has continued
to enhance its testing and on-site medical support as well as reducing all
non-essential mine site personnel. It has also increased the supply chain
thresholds for consumables which will enable the mine to operate for extended
periods. While Yaramoko continues
to operate in accordance with the annual operating plan, several contingency
plans have been developed in the event that underground mining rates were
affected by a prolonged Covid-19 related interruption. These options include the
processing of surface stockpiles, of which there is approximately four months
of low-grade material (~3g/t Au) available. Liquidity position Roxgold finished the
quarter with approximately $50 million of cash and gold doré on hand. The
Company strengthened its liquidity position in the quarter following the
drawdown of the remaining $15 million of its revolving credit facility to
maximise cash reserves and reduce liquidity risk given the volatile and
uncertain financial market conditions. In addition, the Company
continues to make regularly scheduled gold shipments from Yaramoko. Earlier
this week, the quarter ending gold doré balance of 3,662 ounces, together with
an additional 2,974 ounces poured since the start of April, was shipped from
site further underpinning the Company’s liquidity position. 2020 Guidance Based upon Q1 production results, Roxgold is slightly ahead of expectations and remains on track to deliver between 120,000 and 130,000 ounces of production from Yaramoko absent any significant deterioration in operating conditions.