Attendance at the 88th Prospectors & Developers Association of Canada (PDAC) 2020 Convention totaled 23,144, highlighting the resilience and innovation of the international mineral exploration and mining sector. The annual convention, held in Toronto is one of world’s premier industry events, bringing together investors, analysts, mining executives, geologists, students, and government officials. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau returned, making him the first sitting prime minister to appear for two consecutive years. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 4, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here “This is the must-attend event for anyone connected to the mineral and mining industry across the world, and marks my 33rd straight year,” said PDAC President Felix Lee. “The PDAC Convention’s significance is now widely recognised by all levels of government who look forward to using it as an opportunity for announcements.” This year’s programme focused on capital markets, indigenous, student and early career, sustainability and geoscience as well as short courses and presentation rooms. Highlights from PDAC 2020 included minister of Natural Resources, Seamus O’Regan, announcing the next phase of the Canadian Minerals and Metals Plan (CMMP). Meanwhile, Trudeau announced that the federal government will be promoting the adoption of on-road to off-road electric vehicles, including vehicles used in mining applications. Ontario Premier Doug Ford and Minister Greg Rickford announced Ontario will develop road access in northern Ontario to service First Nations communities and potentially develop the Ring of Fire project. Furthermore, Catherine Raw, CEO at North America Barrick Gold Corporation, discussed the recent spate of M&A in the gold mining sector, how it differs from that of the past, and the potential implications this has on investment and growth in the future. The convention is the culmination of advocacy efforts undertaken by PDAC throughout the year on behalf of its 7,500 members and the mineral exploration and development industry. Read more about PDAC Next year’s event will take place from 7 to 10 March, 2021. About the PDAC PDAC is the leading voice of the mineral exploration and development community. With over 7,500 members around the world, PDAC’s mission is to promote a globally responsible, vibrant and sustainable mineral sector that encourages leading practices in technical, operational, environmental, safety and social performance. Please visit www.pdac.ca