During this uncertain time, it is all too easy to feel powerless in the fight against the Coronavirus pandemic. Now more than ever, many of us are looking for a way to educate ourselves with accurate information, soothe our anxiety and most importantly to monitor our health. CoronaFighter is a
web-enabled app found at www.testforcovid.co.za – the app allows you to track
your symptoms through a simplified automated self-monitoring process. The CoronaFighter
platform is at the forefront of a medical revolution that puts you at the
centre of quality informative Covid-19 information you need. It provides you
with reliable statistics, resources and validated research that are crucial in
catching cases early and helps to communicate efficiently with medical staff. By providing you with the
tools and information they need for self-monitoring, CoronaFighter reduces
pressure on testing points and protects its users from the risk of infection
presented by the testing centres themselves. Due to COVID-19’s tendency
to present symptoms slowly and be passed along incredibly easily, we should
start self-monitoring as soon as possible. The health status and
symptoms of patients with Coronavirus also change over time, and pre-testing
will ensure that there are fewer false negative tests. By gathering updated
information daily, officials will be able to identify patterns in symptom
development that can lead to earlier diagnosis and limit further spread. The easy-to-follow test
gives you and all South Africans an accessible way to compare your current
health profile to the latest NICD1 guidelines. To test yourself for COVID-19 simply sign-up on www.testforcovid.co.za with your email, phone number or Google Account, where you’ll give CoronaFighter a brief medical and travel history, and the app will be able to tell you what the latest NICD guidelines suggest you do next. The platform was developed as an open-source initiative to ensure you get the best possible CoronaFighter app. Over 35 hardworking and passionate doctors, software engineers, creatives and marketers were able, in the space of one week, to create CoronaFighter. Sign up here The app was designed to collect data to provide medical authorities with reactive feedback on where COVID-19 hotspots are, and aids in providing crucial data so that medical resources can be used in the most efficient way possible. Read more about coronavirus CoronaFighter presents you with the opportunity to be calm and mindful about your health status, it makes medical care easy to find and gives you an active way to contribute to the research that will ultimately win the battle against COVID-19.