Tenova business unit TAKRAF Africa, an integrated solutions provider in the fields of materials handling and minerals processing, prides itself on delivering an unparalleled service to the coal sector – with passion and energy, MD RICHARD SPÄTH tells LAURA CORNISH. This has seen the company more recently focus its energy on ensuring its equipment is well suited to the industry’s flowsheet, processing and environmental needs. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 3, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here TAKRAF Africa’s Bradford Breaker has largely become a household name in the coal sector – thanks to the advantages it offers in producing a ‘cleaner’ coal product. In an era where the industry is struggling to shake off its dirty reputation, this piece of equipment is ideally suited to producing a better spec’d and sized coal product for the end-user. “The continuous improvement of equipment such
as the Bradford Breaker is an example of the commitment TAKRAF Africa has
towards helping our clients improve their processing performance and product
output. This forms part of our company’s strategy to add value by understanding
their process flowsheets,” says Späth. The result of this drive has seen the company add a new equipment range to its suite of products – mineral sizers. “This is an essential piece of equipment in all mining sectors and equally in coal and we believe we can add value through introducing them into coal processing circuits to size coal fractions efficiently,” Späth continues. Read more about coal While TAKRAF Africa may be a new entrant to
the sizer market, the MD highlights that the sizer’s unique selling point is
its superior maintainability functionality – “the replacement of our wear
components, on what is a high wearing piece of equipment, can be done in a very
short timeframe, and this results in reduced plant downtime – which the coal
sector is desperate to achieve.” The perfect package deal The industry stands to benefit further if
incorporating a sizer in combination with a Bradford Breaker. Together these
two key equipment items ensure an optimally sized coal product, and one that
has very little shale and grit, which compromises quality. “We believe the coal sector is looking for a
solution that delivers on the benefits we are offering through our
sizer/breaker package,” reiterates Bhavesh Bhaga, TAKRAF Africa’s engineered
technologies general manager. “We are consequently confident that in 2020 and
beyond our success in this field will continue.” TAKRAF Africa has the exclusive distribution
and manufacturing rights to sell TerraSource Global’s Bradford Breaker in the southern
African region.  Through years of service
to the market, the South Africa-based company has refined the technology and
optimised it to cater to local coal mining conditions. “The unique design of our screen panels offers the most efficient performance in this market space.  When combined with our after-market support service, we believe our breakers are the best on the market,” Bhaga highlights. “With over 35 breakers installed and in operation, the product’s performance speaks for itself, which includes (by comparison with other methods of secondary or tertiary crushing), lower opex and capex, lower power consumption, reduced downtime and easy retrofit capabilities – “all resulting in greater crushing efficiency.” Keeping abreast of the market While a large portion of TAKRAF Africa’s client
base comprises the large-scale coal miners in South Africa, it has expanded its
product range to cater to the growing number of junior coal mining companies
which Eskom is aligning with to secure sufficient coal feed. As such, the company launched its semi-mobile
Bradford Breaker about three years ago – giving it an entrance into building a
solid reputation with junior coal miners. TAKRAF Africa’s semi-mobile breaker
ranges in size from 200 – 900 tph throughput, capable of handling lump sizes of
up to 800 mm. “To further assist this industry, TAKRAF
Africa is not only prepared to fund the necessary test work to validate the
correct breaker size and throughput, but will even consider financing options
for the capex portion of the breaker installation,” Bhaga continues. The bigger focus area In addition to TAKRAF’s well known products in mining and materials handling, the broader product range also incorporates the DELKOR range of solid/liquid separation equipment and a varying range of air pollution control systems. These equipment ranges play an important role in TAKRAF’s contribution to assist clients in ensuring that mining and minerals beneficiation is done in a responsible and sustainable manner. “Our approach, regardless of the equipment or solutions we are providing, entails adopting a mind-set that caters to the needs of our clients and the industry, whilst also pro-actively assisting the industry to minimise the impact on the environment. “Developing and equipping ourselves to provide the market with innovative and efficient solutions is at the core of our business.  In addition to this, assisting our clients to reduce the environmental impact of their operations has become a priority,” Bhaga concludes. TAKRAF sizersOffer the following benefits: Custom design Support services About TAKRAF TAKRAF, a Tenova company, is
an integrated solutions provider to the global mining, bulk material handling,
minerals processing and beneficiation industries, offering innovative
technological solutions as well as process and commodity knowledge along the industry
value chains. With the integration of the well-known DELKOR and, Tenova
Advanced Technologies (formerly Bateman Advanced Technologies) brand of
products into TAKRAF as specialised product lines, our portfolio for the
mineral processing and beneficiation sectors has been considerably enhanced. For further information, visit: www.takraf.com About Tenova Tenova,
a Techint Group company, is a worldwide partner for innovative, reliable
solutions in metals and mining. Leveraging a workforce of over three thousand
forward-thinking professionals located in 22 countries across 5 continents,
Tenova designs technologies and develops services that help companies reduce
costs, save energy, limit environmental impact and improve working conditions. For further information, visit: www.tenova.com