TSX-listed graphite-focused company Gratomic has received a Notice from the Ministry of Mines and Energy of Namibia that the minister is prepared to grant Mining License 215 for its Aukam graphite property in Namibia. The license area falls within the proximity of the Aukam processing
plant and the graphite bearing shear zone for a total of 5 002 ha. Securing the mining license is a critical step towards moving
the Aukam mine into commercial production. The company has completed eight months of pilot testing on
historically mined product and conducted an internal study on the efficiency of
the pilot processing facility on this material. Through rigorous testing and adjustments to the plant, Gratomic
can now produce a concentrate of up to 98% Cg. Management has subsequently
decided to build a 20 000 tpa processing plant. To date, 90% of construction is complete. Upon completion of the
remaining 10%, the company will initially start processing material from
historical workings left at the surface when the mine last operated in 1974. Gratomic
recently appointed Dr Ian Flint to complete a preliminary economic assessment
on the Aukam graphite processing plant. The study, its recommendations, and
their subsequent implementation, will ensure the scale up of the existing pilot
plant to a commercial scale processing facility that will provide the desired
concentrate grades and production rates. With respect to site exploration, in the coming months diamond
drilling will resume at Aukam Graphite. The drilling will be conducted utilising
company-owned drilling equipment, focusing on areas proximal to graphite
mineralisation, depicted by previous diamond drilling, underground excavation
and surface outcrop sampling. The drill targeting will be systematic with the expectation of producing an NI 43-101 resource estimate. LEARN MORE about other graphite juniors in Africa Arno Brand, President and CEO Gratomic states that: “the company
will be able to satisfy all of the conditions in the notice and proceed to
commercialisation of its Aukam graphite mine. This marks a significant
milestone for the company.” No
mineral resources, let alone mineral reserves demonstrating economic viability
and technical feasibility, have been delineated on the Aukam property. The company
is not in a position to demonstrate or disclose any capital and/or operating
costs that may be associated with the processing plant. The
company advises that it has not based its production decision on even the
existence of mineral resources let alone on a feasibility study of mineral
reserves, demonstrating economic and technical viability, and, as a result,
there may be an increased uncertainty of achieving any particular level of
recovery of minerals or the cost of such recovery, including increased risks
associated with developing a commercially mineable deposit. Historically, such projects have a much higher risk of economic
and technical failure. There is no guarantee that production will begin as
anticipated or at all or that anticipated production costs will be achieved. Failure to commence production would have a material adverse impact on the company’s ability to generate revenue and cash flow to fund operations. Failure to achieve the anticipated graphite production costs would have a material adverse impact on the company’s cash flow and future profitability. LEARN MORE about other mining projects in Namibia Gratomic
is an advanced materials company focused on mine to market commercialisation of
graphite products most notably high value graphene-based components for a range
of mass market products. The company has a Joint Venture collaboration with Perpetuus Carbon Technology, a leading European manufacturer of graphenes, to use Aukam graphite to manufacture graphene products for commercialisation on an industrial scale.