Anglo
American has provided an update on how it is supporting its employees, host
communities and countries of operation in its global response to the
fast-evolving COVID-19 pandemic. Anglo
American Chief Executive, Mark Cutifani, says: “Society
is facing the greatest threat to global health in a century. Safety is at the
heart of all that we do at Anglo American, and we are doing all that we can to
safeguard our people and their families from the spread of COVID-19, while also
providing support to our host communities and countries where it’s most needed. “Across our operations Anglo has implemented all the appropriate health, hygiene and distancing measures aimed at protecting our colleagues’ safety and health, while also responding to our local communities’ needs by continuing to provide many essential services. “We
are maintaining the security and integrity of our assets and the supply of
essential raw materials to customers, preserving our ability to return
operations to normal levels as swiftly as possible when appropriate. We want to
ensure we are ready to support what will be a crucial economic recovery phase
for the countries in which we operate and the global economy.” “Anglo is a global mining company, with a longstanding commitment as a leader in responsible mining and we have a vital role to play in delivering support to our host communities throughout this difficult time. The broad-based economic and social contribution that mining makes cannot be underestimated, particularly so in the safe and efficient functioning of our host communities. “In
addition to these continuing benefits and the essential services that we
provide in many communities, we are also responding directly with additional
support aimed squarely at the health and economic effects of COVID-19. “These
additional measures are tailored to the specific needs of our host communities
and include providing additional hospital facilities, beds, medical equipment
and PPE, while also providing accommodation to health professionals. “We
are continuing to increase and broaden our monetary and in-kind support as
conditions and needs evolve. “Throughout
this global pandemic, we are guided by our Purpose and we are staying true to
our values. Consistent with the extended breadth of our support to local and
regional communities, I would like to thank our colleagues across the globe for
their continued hard work and dedication to stay safe, fit and healthy during
these challenging times.” Anglo
American’s statement continues to say: Employees Our
employees are at the heart of our business and we’ve taken decisive,
wide-ranging measures that are stringently applied to protect both the health
and well-being of them and their families. Our
people and their families are naturally worried about COVID-19, and the impact
that government measures to control it will have on their livelihoods. While
the commercial impacts of this crisis will likely be significant for many
businesses, we are doing all that we can to insulate our employees during this
period. For
example, in South Africa where the most extensive operational impact is
currently felt, we have committed to continue paying the salaries of all of our
47,000 employees during the 21-day lockdown period, ensuring that they are able
to focus on the health and safety of their families and their local communities. To
that end, we have implemented an extensive health awareness and support
programme called “WeCare”, specifically to protect the health and wellbeing of
our more than 90,000 employees and full-time contractors around the world
during the COVID-19 pandemic. As
part of this programme, we are helping colleagues better understand how to
protect themselves and others from catching the virus, monitoring their health
to pick up early symptoms, and to manage their health if they test positive for
COVID-19. Community
Response Plans In
order to provide the most effective and relevant support to our communities, we
have designed a Community Response Plan (CRP) to guide site teams as to the
initiatives that should be undertaken to support their host communities. The
CRP has been developed by engaging with our communities, traditional and faith
leaders, and government agencies to understand their identified needs and
ensure we provide the right support at the right time, both during the pandemic
and into the vital economic recovery phase. We have produced guidance for our operations on how best to respond and have made this publicly available for other companies to use. Our direct response to address the effects of COVID-19 is tailored to the specific and most urgent needs of our host communities and countries, recognising their very different socio-economic factors. The main elements of our response are set out below, by country (only African countries highlighted here – the full listing is available here): South
Africa Anglo
American operates in many areas of South Africa that are underdeveloped. This
places a responsibility on us, as South Africa’s largest mining company, to act
with the utmost consideration and care towards those who live in our host
communities and depend on us – particularly during a time such as this. Across
several provinces, our operations play a vital role in many of our host
communities and we are committed to supporting them. In many instances, we
drive the development and maintenance of essential infrastructure and services
including roads, health facilities, medication, clean water, and energy, which
are needed now more than ever. As
is the case globally, our overwhelming priority is the safety and health of our
people and their families. We are continuing to operate only where we can do
safely and by having all appropriate health measures in place. If we believe we
cannot operate in a way that adequately protects our people or our communities,
we will adjust our plans on a site-by-site basis. Even
with certain operations at a reduced level of activity, this means we can most
effectively support the government’s proactive efforts to curb the spread of
COVID-19. For
example, it enables us to have the people and resources in place to continue
providing chronic medication to those who need it, make health infrastructure
available to support the national effort, and provide access to basic
provisioning such as food and water during this crisis. As
a result of keeping our coal mines operating, for example, we can keep our water
treatment plant in Mpumalanga open, ensuring community members have access to
clean water at this critical time. We
are also able to continue generating economic value for South Africa at a time
when it needs it most. We have a duty to help keep South Africa’s economic
wheels turning so that people get paid, so that essential services can
continue, so that the government earns some taxes, but we must do so in a way
that keeps people healthy. Despite operating at reduced levels in South Africa, we are still spending approximately US$125 million per week on procurement of goods and services from our suppliers and on wages, while also generating vital export earnings for the country. Read more about South Africa In
addition to the continued provision of a wide variety of essential community
services across the country that are business as usual for us, we are providing
a number of other services in our host communities to aid the country’s
response to the pandemic, including: We
are also providing significant support to small- and medium-sized businesses,
including a payment holiday until the end of June on any loans, communication
around any government support that is available to them, and working closely
with our supply chain to ensure that there is adequate support on their
contracts and inclusive procurement. Botswana In
Botswana, diamonds in general, and the Government’s partnership with De Beers
in particular, have played a central role in the country’s socio-economic
development. The Debswana (50:50 JV between the Government and De Beers) mines in the country, and the medical facilities that the business has established around them, are providing vital support to Botswana’s medical preparations in relation to COVID-19. Read more about Botswana This
support includes: Namibia In Namibia, Namdeb Holdings (50:50 JV between the Government and De Beers) plays a key role both nationally and in local communities surrounding diamond recovery areas. Namdeb Holdings and the Debmarine Namibia-Namdeb Foundation have already put in place a range of support both nationally and at a local level in support of the country’s response to COVID-19. Read more about Namibia This
includes the following: