Gold mining company Caledonia Mining Corporation has decided to defer its approval of the declaration of the second quarterly dividend of 2020 due to the uncertain business environment associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Caledonia has paid a quarterly dividend since 2014 and the payments are an important element of the company’s strategy to create and enhance shareholder value. “The board will therefore keep this decision under constant review as it monitors prevailing market conditions,” the company said in a statement to its shareholders. READ MORE: Caledonia reports gross profit of $31.1 million for 2019 Following
the announcement by Zimbabwe’s President Emmerson Mnangagwa on 27 March 2020 of
a nationwide lockdown of Zimbabwe from 30 March for a period of 21 days, to
restrict the spread of COVID-19 infections, Caledonia applied for, and was
granted exemption from the lockdown. While gold mining is not an essential service, Caledonia’s Blanket gold mine in Zimbabwe is currently permitted to continue with its operations, while having to demonstrate that it can operate in a manner that contributes to the management of the spread of COVID-19 infections As a result, production at Blanket is continuing,
although at a lower rate than targeted due to the introduction of measures to
reduce the risk of infections being transmitted amongst its employees. Blanket also has consumables and spare parts in its
inventory to sustain uninterrupted gold production well past the end of the
current lockdowns in Zimbabwe and South
Africa. Provided the measures taken by the Zimbabwe and
South African governments do not result in severe and/or prolonged
interruptions to operations, the effect of such measures should not impede the
company’s ability to resume the payment of quarterly dividends. Caledonia’s
cash position on March 26 was $12.5 million.
At the current quarterly dividend rate of 7.5 cents per
share, the dividend payment that was scheduled for payment in April amounts to
approximately $860 000 – less than seven per cent of
Caledonia’s currently available cash. “The COVID-19 pandemic
has elevated global levels of uncertainty. I have full confidence that our
business will emerge from this situation substantially unchanged, but, out of
an abundance of caution, we have decided to defer the dividend decision until
we have  greater clarity on the wider implications of this highly fluid
situation,” says Caledonia Mining Corporation chairman Leigh Wilson. “The resumption of dividends will depend on, inter alia, Blanket maintaining a reasonable level of production; receiving payment in full and on-time for all gold sales; being able to make the necessary local and international payments and being able to replenish its supplies of consumables and other items. READ MORE: Caledonia increases shareholding in Blanket Mine to 64% Caledonia entered the unprecedented situation
with a strong balance sheet such that it can withstand an interruption to production
of several months. “Our balance sheet remains in an enviable position and the dividend remains comfortably affordable. The dividend deferral is a continuation of the prudent approach to capital allocation that we have followed for several years – a path that we expect to continue,” Wilson concludes.