Emerging heavy mineral sands developer Strandline Resources has achieved another important step towards the development of the Fungoni heavy mineral sands project in Tanzania by signing a US$26 million project finance facility agreement with Nedbank CIB. The facility would account for the majority of Fungoni’s total
estimated capital cost of $35 million, including taxes, levies and excluding
financing costs. During 2019, Nedbank conducted detailed due diligence of technical, financial, market, legal, environmental and social fundamentals and has since progressed compilation of documentation for the facility. READ MORE: Strandline Resources committed to advancing Tanzanian project portfolio In view of the current evolving COVID-19 pandemic, the
parties will also continue to evaluate the potential impact of the pandemic on
the project fundamentals and the outcome of this evaluation will lead into
Strandline and Nedbank’s final investment/credit decision to proceed with the
construction of the project prior to financial close. All parties are now working towards satisfaction of
conditions precedent to financial close and first draw down. This includes
finalising the additional finance documents with Nedbank, obtaining the
remaining government related approvals (including completing documentation for
the Tanzanian government’s 16% free-carried interest in the project company,
compensation and resettlement agreements and access arrangements in relation to
the project site), as well as satisfying the equity shortfall. As part of this equity raising process, Strandline is in
discussions with international finance institutions about strategic equity
investment in Fungoni and/or the company. Strandline Resources MD Luke Graham said signing of the
Nedbank facility agreement is an important achievement and enables Strandline
to continue to advance Fungoni towards a development decision. With key mining and environment licences in place, the DFS
completed, offtake contracts secured for 100% of forecast product revenue,
major construction contracts executed and the Nedbank debt facility agreement
now signed, Strandline remains on track to develop its first project in
Tanzania and capitalise on the forecasted strong mineral sands market. The Fungoni project, as confirmed in the DFS, is an
exceptional “starter” project for Strandline in the emerging mineral sands
province of Tanzania. The project will deliver strong financial returns, including
EBITDA of $115 million, from the production of premium-quality zircon and
titanium products. Fungoni is expected to pave the way for development and value appreciation of Strandline’s other mineral sands projects in Tanzania, including the large-scale Tajiri project.