The COVID-19 pandemic will be recorded as one of the most devastating Black Swan events ever in modern history. No industry will emerge from this period unaffected, and in some cases absolutely ruined. Everyday the mining the
global mining industry issues reports and statement regarding the status of
their operations with several in Africa resorting to care and maintenance
protocols. It seems the Democratic
Republic of Congo will bear the greatest risk burden. The country is one of the
largest contributors to global mining production when ranked by the sheer
monetary value of the mining sector. The DRC has significant
foreign involvement, with at least 25 international mining companies operating
in it. There have been 48 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the country since the first confirmed case on 10 March – one of the smaller totals on the continent. Jacques Kyabula, the governor
of Haut-Katanga province has since issued a lockdown order. This is significant
as the province is a copper and cobalt heartland. When combined with
Lualaba province Haut-Katanga accounts for almost all the country’s cobalt
production. This is a huge concern
for the country which is on the brink on becoming a mining superpower. From a global perspective
the lowering of commodity price
assumptions by
Fitch Ratings has unsettled miners and their relative markets. Nobody knows for certain, amidst a sea of speculation, what the immediate and long-term future scenarios are for a prolonged lockdown or, hopefully, resuming business and beginning to recover from the Blackest of The Black Swan events. Read more about COVID-19 If you’re interested to
read more about Modern Black Swan events (see list below) and the effects they
had on the world – click here. 1997: Asian Financial Crisis2000: The Dot-Com Crash2001: Crash of 9/112008: Global Financial Meltdown2009: European Sovereign Debt Crisis2011: Fukushima Nuclear Disaster2014: Crude Oil Crisis2015: Black Monday China2016: BREXIT2019: Coronavirus/COVID-19