Predictive Discovery has secured the right to acquire up to 100% of the highly mineralised Koundian Property Package located along strike from Managem’s 2 Moz Tri-K gold deposits, within Guinea’s prolific Siguiri Basin. Predictive now holds
approximately 799 km2 of prospective landholdings across nine
permits/authorisations in Guinea, all containing artisanal gold workings. All projects are within
the Siguiri Basin which hosts AngloGold’s large Siguiri Mine (+10 Moz). These
project areas were identified by Predictive during its terrainscale assessment
of the Siguiri Basin in late 2018 using the Company’s PredictoreTM gold
targeting system. Predictive’s regional
assessment has confirmed that the Siguiri Basin is both highly prospective for
gold mineralisation and underexplored. The Siguiri Basin forms part of the richly mineralised West African Birimian gold belt and consists largely of meta-sediments with minor granitic rocks, metavolcanics and mafic to ultramafic intrusives. The Koundian Project lies within the Birimian-age Siguiri Basin which contains widespread gold mineralisation including the +5 Moz deposits of Siguiri and Lero. The 2 Moz Tri-K deposits lie along strike to the south of Predictive’s permits, the closest of which, the 1.2 Moz Koulekoun deposit, is just 7 km south of the Koundian Project’s southern boundary. The 612,000 oz Mandiana gold deposits lie 15 km to the east of the Koundian Project. Tri-K is under construction at present and expected to pour gold in 2021. Read more about gold The Koundian Project lies
within the Kinieran-Mandiana gold field and covers a highly prospective area
with multiple gold mineralised sites and strong gold values suggesting a very
favourable geological setting. Some of the individual
mineralised sites are over 500 metres long and given that the area contains
very limited bedrock outcrop, there is excellent potential for the discovery of
new continuously mineralised gold zones. Predictive Discovery MD, Paul Roberts, comments: “Following an extensive
process of negotiation with local partners, the Company is very pleased to have
secured the right to acquire up to 100% of the Koundian property package,
located within the Siguiri Basin. “Koundian represents a
rare and exciting opportunity in greenfields gold exploration – a strongly
mineralised property in a highly prospective region with very extensive
artisanal workings, limited past exploration and close to large known gold
deposits. “Acquisition of the Koundian Project is consistent with the Company’s broader strategy of focusing on the Siguiri Basin in Guinea through a 100%-owned portfolio.”