ASX-listed AVZ Minerals subsidiary, AVZ Power, as signed an MoU with the Democratic Republic of Congo’s Ministry of Hydraulic Resources and Energy to investigate the feasibility of refurbishment of the Mpiana-Mwanga hydro-electric power station on Luvua River and associated power grids in the Manono Territory in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
Mpiana-Mwanga hydro-electric power station is located about 85 km east-south-east
of the proposed Manono mine site. The power station was originally built in
1933 to service the historic tin mine but closed in 1982 when operations
ceased. At
present, power is generated at the Manono town site using diesel generators and
a recently commissioned 1.5 MW solar power system, whilst at AVZ’s camp it is
powered by a smaller 20 kVA solar system with a diesel powered back-up
generator. Based on a positive outcome of the feasibility studies into re-commissioning the power station, it is AVZ Powers’ intention to acquire from the DRC Government a long-term, 100% exclusive lease to rehabilitate the Mpiana-Mwanga hydro-electric power station. READ MORE: AVZ Minerals begins ESIA studies at Manono project It is estimated up to approximately ~54 MW of electricity
can be generated from the rehabilitated power station – sufficient to power the
Manono town site and AVZ’s nearby mining camp and associated infrastructure and
any future expansion of the mine site, including a 25 000 tpa hydroxide plant. “We have been working towards securing this opportunity for several months now as we consider the rehabilitation of the Mpiana-Mwanga power station is a major step forward for the company,” says AVZ Minerals MD Mr Nigel Ferguson. “Controlling the refurbishment of the hydro power plant
allows the Company to develop the hydro plant in phases that align with AVZ’s
mine expansion programme, with the first phase delivering approximately 18 MW
of electricity from two turbines. “We can then expand the existing power station, which has capacity for six turbines, to deliver additional electricity for our expanded DMS plus flotation operation and finally, our third expansion phase – establishing a hydroxide plant – with a combined requirement of approximately 54 MW of electricity. READ MORE: AVZ Minerals DFS fieldwork gains momentum “From an economic perspective, AVZ is likely to generate
significant longer-term savings from generating its own electricity at an
estimated 3 to 4 cents per kWh, as opposed to using diesel powered generators
at an estimated 42 cents per kWh. “Ultimately, the electricity generated from the power station
could be used for operating all of our mining equipment, making the Manono
lithium and tin project a 100% “green” mine, as well as providing sufficient
electricity to power the entire Manono town site and rehabilitate the
associated power grids in the Manono Territory. “This would be a significant achievement for AVZ Minerals and everyone associated with the Manono project, including our shareholders and our financiers.”