Indiana Resources has updated the status of its on legal activities in relation to its majority shareholding position in Ntaka Nickel in Tanzania. Ntaka Nickel (NNHL) has appointed a specialist
investment arbitration law firm to represent its interests and advise on
actions necessary to ensure its rights to the Licence are protected. Since the last update provided to shareholders, Indiana’s Board confirms that it has received numerous approaches from experienced and respected International litigation funding firms interested in working with the Company to ensure its rights are protected and pursued. Read more about mining in East Africa Indiana is encouraged by the level of
interest and the feedback received thus far from the different litigation
funders. NNHL and its lawyers are now working to engage a firm interested in
providing litigation funding services. Pursuant to the relevant provisions of
the Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments, which entered into force in 1996 (the
“BIT”), the Government of Tanzania and NNHL have now entered a six-month period
wherein the parties can negotiate to reach a mutually acceptable outcome. Given numerous submissions have been
provided to the Government over the last 2 years in relation to this matter,
the Government is fully aware of the background and quantum of historic
investment, work completed to date, along with a proposed development timeline
and budget to advance the Project to development. No correspondence has been received by
NNHL from the Government in relation to this matter to date. Should an amicable resolution not be achieved
within the six-month period, the Company can pursue its claims before ICSID.
ICSID is housed within the World Bank and is the agreed forum for settlement of
any dispute between NNHL and the Tanzanian Government. Through this forum NNHL can seek full
compensation for the loss suffered through the revocation of the Retention
Licence for the Project. The quantum of the claim may include, but will not be
limited to: Over US$60 million has been spent
historically on exploration at Ntaka Hill that has included definition of a
total (measured, indicated, inferred) JORC compliant (2013) resource of 56.2 Mt
@ 0.63% Ni, 0.14% Cu, 0.2% Co for 356,380t of contained nickel, and the
completion of feasibility studies and other predevelopment work programmes. Bronwyn Barnes, Non-Executive Chairman of Indiana Resources comments: “Whilst we remain very disappointed that
the Tanzanian Government unilaterally revoked our Retention Licence and
subsequently advertised the Project on its website as available to potential
new investors without consultation, we have moved quickly to protect the
interests of shareholders and protect their rights to their historic
investment. “With the support of our team of dedicated lawyers, we have moved quickly to compile historic information, and prepare our case for a potential arbitration. "The level of interest we have received from parties on this matter, and particularly the number of unsolicited approaches we have had from reputable litigation funders, has been considerable and most encouraging, and we look forward to providing further updates on due course.”