Gold had its best performance since 2010, rising by 18.4% in US dollar terms last year. It outperformed major global bond and emerging market stock benchmarks over that period. In
addition, gold reached record highs in most major currencies except the US
dollar and Swiss franc. Gold
rose most between early June and early September as uncertainty increased and
interest rates fell. But
investors’ appetite for gold was apparent throughout the year, as seen by strong
ETF flows, robust central bank demand and an increase in COMEX net longs
positioning. High
risks and low rates on the horizon The Gold Council expects that many of the global dynamics seeded over the past few years will remain generally supportive for gold in 2020. In particular, the Council believes that: Read: Commodity prices: Gold shone brightest in 2019 A
supportive environment for gold investment Looking
ahead, the Gold Council believes investors – including central banks – will
face an increasing set of geopolitical concerns, while many pre-existing ones
will likely be pushed back rather than being resolved. In
addition, the very low level of interest rates worldwide will likely keep stock
prices high and valuations at extreme levels. And
although investors may not step away from risk assets, anecdotal evidence
suggests they are increasing exposure to safe-haven assets like gold to hedge
their portfolios. One
of the key drivers of gold, especially in the short and medium term, is the
opportunity cost of holding it relative to other assets, such as short-dated
bonds. Unlike
bonds, gold does not pay interest or dividends because it does not have credit
risk. This perceived lack of yield can deter some investors. But in an environment where a quarter of developed market sovereign debt is trading with negative nominal rates – and once adjusted for inflation, the Council’s analysis suggests that a whopping 90% is trading with negative real rates – the Council believes the opportunity cost of gold almost goes away, even providing what can be seen as a positive “cost of carry” relative to bonds. Read: Don’t stop me now: central bank gold demand in August This
is further evidenced by the strong positive correlation between the amount of
debt and price of gold over the past four years. To some degree this
illustrates the erosion of confidence in fiat currencies due to monetary
intervention. And
the low rate environment is unlikely to change any time soon. Many central
banks – the highest number since the global financial crisis – are cutting
rates, expanding or implementing quantitative easing and, in some instances,
doing both. In
fact, gold has historically performed well in the 12-to-24-month period
following policy shifts from tightening to “on-hold” or “easing” – the
environment in which we currently find ourselves. And,
historically, when real rates have been negative, gold’s average monthly
returns have been twice as high as the long-term average. Even
slightly positive real interest rates may not push gold prices down. Effectively, the Council’s analysis shows that it has only been in periods with significantly higher real interest rates – an unlikely outcome given the current market conditions – that gold returns have been negative. Gold
volatility may rise As the gold price significantly rose in 2019 so did volatility, but, similarly to other assets, it remains well below its long-term trend. The Council does not anticipate a reduction in gold volatility near term. Should
the economic and political environment deteriorate, it may even rise,
especially as gold volatility historically exhibits a positive skew in such
circumstances, tending to increase as stocks pull back. Weak
economic growth may affect consumers Market
surveys indicate that most economists expect growth in 2020 for most countries,
with a few forecasting contractions in major economies by 2021 or 2022. However,
median forecasts also show an expectation of softer global economic growth
relative to 2019. This,
combined with gold price volatility at or above current levels, may discourage
jewellery consumers and cause technology demand to soften. Budgets
of Chinese consumers are shrinking and their habits changing The
slowdown in China’s economy growth and rising staples’ prices have been
squeezing consumers’ budgets. And while ostensible progress in trade
negotiations with the US may restore some confidence, uncertainty lingers. With tighter budgets and higher expenditure on staple goods consumers will likely limit their consumption of luxury items, putting pressure on China’s jewellery demand. Read: Gold exploration vital for future supply Concern about the global economy has spurred the increase in gold price as central banks adopt a more dovish tone and the FED cutting interest rates. In
addition, demand from younger consumers is shifting towards innovative
jewellery pieces with fashionable designs and lighter weights – a divergence in
sales of traditional and innovative products that we expect will continue in
2020. Gold
price volatility and higher taxes may deter Indian consumers The
Indian Goods and Services Tax (GST) – introduced in 2017 – rose last year
across many categories.3 And gold import duty increased from 10% to 12.5%. Until
tax cuts are introduced as a credible incentive to spur economic growth – the
infrastructure for which may not be available until 2021 – higher taxes are
exacerbating the impact of the record high local gold price on consumption. And
while the introduction of mandatory hallmarking for gold jewellery at the
beginning of the year may enhance consumer trust, this potential initial
disruption should not be ignored. In
all, we believe consumer and gold trade sentiment may remain soft through 2020. Economic
reforms may improve long-term demand Both China and India are implementing economic reforms geared towards strengthening growth and internal consumption. In China, the “belt and road” initiative should also strengthen its regional role and reduce dependence on the West. Read more about gold In
India, policy reforms designed to bring transparency and an orderly trade
structure to many sectors of the economy are expected to improve confidence,
remove inefficiencies and promote growth. The Council expect these factors to be a long-term positive for gold demand although their effects may take time to become apparent. Valuing
gold through demand and supply Gold
does not conform to most of the common valuation frameworks used for stocks or
bonds. Without a coupon or dividend, typical discounted cash flow models fail.
And there are no expected earnings or book-to-value ratios either. Its
dual nature as a consumer good and an investment means that jewellery demand
can be boosted by economic growth even if investment demand may fall amid lower
uncertainty or higher interest rates. These seeming contradictions can pose challenges,
but they can make gold an effective strategic asset. In fact, the Council’s research shows that valuing gold is intuitive. Its
equilibrium price is determined by the intersection of demand and supply. Gold’s
performance can be explained by four broad sets of drivers: Generally
positive implied performance for 2020 Gold
rallied by 4% in December 2019, increasing by an additional 6% by 7 January
2020. While the Council believes that there are various reasons for this move, tensions in the Middle East linked to the US-Iran confrontation ultimately pushed the price to an almost seven-year high in early January. Subsequent
comments by President Trump aimed to ease concerns, pushing the price down to
the US$1,560/oz-US$1,550/oz level as of 10 January 2020. Yet, the commodity remains still 2.6% higher relative to the end of 2019. The council expect that investor positioning related to this specific event will likely influence gold’s performance in the near term. But over the medium term, broader financial and geopolitical uncertainty and developments in monetary policy will play a more important role. For example, using Qaurum, the Council analysed the performance as implied by four different hypothetical macro-economic scenarios provided by Oxford Economics. These
included: The
result of the analysis suggests that, in general, gold may see a positive
performance in 2020. While some of the scenarios – with the exception of an economic upturn in emerging markets – could result in lower consumer demand, its dampening effect on price performance will likely be offset by potentially robust investment demand on the back of deteriorating credit conditions and stable to lower interest rates. Read: World Gold Council launches Responsible Gold Mining Principles It
is important to note, however, that this is not a comprehensive list of
possible scenarios. Instead, they reflect key investor concerns as per Oxford
Economics’ Global Risk Survey. Therefore, hypothetically, improving market sentiment – for example, a reduction on perceptions of risk, a lower likelihood of further rate cuts by the Fed or other major central banks, or tighter monetary policy through means other than rate cuts – could put downward pressure on gold’s price performance relative to the scenarios currently available on Goldhub.com.