Tanzania focused gold and nickel exploration and development company Katoro Gold has entered into a binding conditional agreement to participate in a strategic gold production opportunity in South Africa, focused on the reprocessing of an existing 1.34 Moz of gold JORC compliant tailings resource. READ MORE: Kibo Mining sells Kibo Nickel to Katoro Gold As further set out below, Katoro
also announces that it has raised £397 000 in the form of a
convertible loan note (CLN) with a number of high net worth clients of SI
Capital, the company's broker, to support its commitments under the agreement. Overview of the agreement, tailings and CLN Katoro has entered into a binding conditional agreement to form a 50/50 unincorporated joint venture (JV) with Blyvoor Gold Operations and its holding company, Target Mine Consulting. The JV partners plan to
exploit potentially viable
deposits of gold and any other minerals from
six gold tailings dams owned by Blyvoor in South
Africa, which contain a JORC code compliant resource of, in
aggregate, 1.34 Moz of gold at an average grade of 0.30g/t gold. Mining
licence and environmental impact assessment The project already has in place
the requisite mining licence and environmental impact assessment (EIA) for the
reprocessing of the tailings, allowing production to commence immediately upon
commissioning of the processing plant. Subject to funding, the JV partners
are targeting initial production of up to 250 000 tpm of material
from the tailings as part of a production ramp-up to achieve production of 500 000
tpm within two years. At 500 000 tpm, the project is
targeted to produce approximately 35 000 ozpa of gold and to have a 35-year
life of mine. Feasibility
studies and testwork The project will seek to use
proven mining and processing technologies, whereby the JV partners
believe recoveries of 56% to 60% are achievable, based on feasibility studies
and test work completed to date by Minxcon, with additional confirmatory
test work planned to optimise the financial projections and conceptual designs
for the processing plant. Cost
of production At 500 000 tpm, the project has
projected low all in sustaining costs (AISC) of approximately US$664/oz
for the first five years of full production. Subject to funding and achieving
500 000 tpm within two years, attractive financial returns are forecast, with
projected unlevered IRR estimated at 31% at a gold price of $1 300. Katoro
loan to the JV Pursuant to the agreement, Katoro
is to provide a R15 million loan to the JV, which will fund ongoing
development work on the project, with a first payment of R5 million
due to be paid by 3 February 2020. The JV partners may drawdown
the balance of the Katoro loan facility, being R10 million, as
required prior to completion of project level financing. All amounts drawn
down constitute a loan to the JV by Katoro and are provided on the terms
outlined below. To fund the Katoro loan facility,
Katoro has raised £397 000 in the form of a CLN, which will fund
the initial tranche of the Katoro loan facility. Katoro has also put
in place a facility with Sanderson
Capital Partners under which the company may require Sanderson to subscribe
for up to £400 000 in the form of a CLN on terms that, if drawn
down, will be no more favourable to Sanderson than the terms on which investors
have participated in the CLN, and which, together with unallocated proceeds of
the CLN, the directors of Katoro expect will fund the additional tranches if
necessary/required. Katoro has already held preliminary discussions with potential funding parties for the project, which the board believe will be secured at the project level and will likely be in the form of debt funding. READ MORE: Haneti has great exploration potential says Katoro “The JV represents a unique and exciting investment opportunity for
the company with the possibility of significant near term revenue generation,” says Katoro Gold executive chairmanLouis Coetzee. “The six tailings dams, containing, in total, 1.34 Moz of gold,
represents a considerable resource for the JV. In addition, the project has
attractive projected economics and notably the targeted 35-year mine life, 35 000
ozpa gold production target, solid recoveries and low initial all in sustaining
costs of $664/oz which compares favourably against the current
gold price of $1 565/oz. “Our initial objective is to rapidly secure the project level funding required to construct and commission the plant to reprocess the Tailings in order to start generating revenues.  I must emphasise that this is financing at the project level and does not represent dilution at the Katoro Gold level,” Coetzee concludes.