Date:  31 March – 1 April 2020 Location: Conrad, Hong Kong, 88 Queensway, Admiralty, Hong Kong Website Mines and Money Asia is the region’s largest
mining investment forum, bringing together investors and miners to Hong Kong
from 31 March – 1 April 2020, for two days of networking, learning, and
deal-making. This
year we’re taking Mines and Money to the investors, taking place at the luxury
Conrad Hong Kong, the self-contained nature of the venue will allow you to
maximise your networking and conversations from breakfast, right through to
evening drinks. See all networking opportunities. You’ll
find conversations and new opportunities waiting for you at every turn, with a
showcase of more than 100 mining projects from around the globe and across the
commodity spectrum. See who’s exhibiting. Mines
and Money Asia is the only place to gain access to more than 500 leading
investors. Whether you’re looking for private equity, or private investors; our
bespoke AI-driven matchmaking platform pre-qualifies your investment needs, so
your pre-arranged meetings deliver and drive business outcomes. Running
alongside your extensive networking schedule you’ll hear from over 100 leading mining, investment and finance experts with a two-day conference program. This year, sessions will
explore the commodity outlook for 2020, look at how mining companies can work
with Chinese investors, and how miners can speed up the process of taking a
mine from exploration, through to production to start delivering bottom-line
profits sooner. View the program here. Investors
and miners attend Mines and Money Asia and leave with new connections, deals,
and business opportunities. Claim your complimentary
investor pass or receive 10% off with
the discount code MRAFRICA Social
Links Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/minesandmoney/ Twitter: https://twitter.com/MinesAndMoney  or @MinesandMoney YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCkZqn833lDkiYVpGrnUVXCw Video 
https://youtu.be/wXVsAkdIohg LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/company/mines-and-money/