With the recent announcement that the South Australian Marshall Liberal Government will be the first government globally to host a  $250 000 crowdsourced competition to fast-track the discovery of mineral deposits in South Australia, what can African nations and explorers gain from leveraging open data initiatives? The ExploreSA: The Gawler Challenge competition is a partnership between the South Australian Marshall Liberal Government and open innovation platform, Unearthed, in a world-wide call for geologists and data scientists to uncover new exploration targets in the state’s highly prospective Gawler Craton region, which currently includes BHP’s Olympic Dam, OZ Minerals’ Prominent Hill and Carrapateena copper-gold deposits. READ MORE: What’s on the horizon for investment in mining exploration in 2020? “This state-of-the-art competition
has the potential to unearth the next Olympic Dam or Carrapateena by
encouraging global thinkers and innovators to interrogate our open-file data and
generate new exploration models and ideas for targeting,” said Minister for
Energy and Mining Dan van Holst Pellekaan. The South Australian government is
the custodian of an extensive amount of geological data across the state, be
that data the government has collected to support exploration activities or
data they host that has been recorded by private companies. However,
historically it has been a challenge for people to process this data at scale. Crowdsourcing enables the government
to readily share this considerable collection of datasets with people from
different disciplines around the globe who can apply their diverse experience
and skills to mineral targeting. It also empowers these data scientists,
geoscientists and mathematicians to collaborate and work through the data in
novel ways. This encourages the development of new workflows, through the
application of emerging machine learning and analytical processes to
exploration geology. Unearthed Industry Lead –
Crowdsourcing, Holly Bridgwater attests that crowdsourcing open exploration
data also provides a unique opportunity to combine hundreds of models and
targets from independent experts into one model, boosting confidence in the
targets generated. “This model to combine diverse thought into consensus reduces uncertainty, dramatically shortens the exploration lifecycle and may significantly increase mineral discovery rates,” said Bridgwater. READ MORE: New data portal to encourage mineral exploration in Uganda All targets generated through
ExploreSA: The Gawler Challenge, including those from the winners of the $250 000
prize pool, will be publicly shared to increase innovation and understanding in
the resources sector by enabling access to data science approaches and modern
geoscience thinking. The rationale used to discover
targets will also be outlined, so those interested can interact with the
outcomes, while participating innovators retain full intellectual property and
gain recognition for their work. ExploreSA: The Gawler Challenge that launches in early March 2020.