Gemfields has announced its intention to seek admission of its Ordinary Shares to trading on the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange. The
Company is not intending to raise capital in conjunction with Admission. The Company
expects that Admission will become effective on 14 February 2020. The AIM listing will provide Gemfields with access to much greater market liquidity, as well as a widening of the current investor base. We are looking forward to this next phase in the Company’s development and to delivering value for all our shareholders. Read: Gemfields raises awareness of responsible gemstone sourcing Sean
Gilbertson, CEO of Gemfields, comments: “We are pleased to announce our decision to bring the Gemfields assets back to the London market, thereby providing UK, European and international investors with the opportunity of being part of the growing precious coloured gemstones market. The past decade has seen a consistent rise in the demand and price for precious coloured gemstones, and Gemfields has been at the forefront of driving that increased awareness, confidence and transparency in the sector from both the market and the consumer. “Our
ownership of the iconic luxury brand, Fabergé, offers the Group direct insight
into perception and pricing of precious coloured gemstones from a consumer perspective. The
Company’s auctions in both rubies and emeralds during 2019 have clearly
demonstrated robust demand and pricing and we continue to see increasing
numbers of participating customers, further validating our pioneering auction
and grading platform.” Key
strengths of the Group World-class
and sector-leading assets The Group’s key producing assets, the Kagem emerald mine in Zambia and the Montepuez ruby mine in Mozambique (MRM), are both expected to have long mine-lives with potential for expansion. Kagem
is estimated to provide more than one fifth of the world’s emeralds and
unearthed the ‘Inkalamu’, or Lion Emerald, a 5,655-carat gem which was
successfully sold in November 2018. MRM
is estimated to provide around half of the world’s ruby supply through shallow,
open-pit mining. The Group has a controlling 75% interest in both Kagem and MRM
and is the operator of both assets. Consistent
growth in consumer demand and price for coloured gemstones The
past decade has seen world record prices at auction houses for cut and polished
emeralds and rubies, surpassing the price of colourless diamonds on a per carat
basis. Prices
realised at Gemfields’ auctions of higher quality Zambian rough emeralds have
increased over 1,500% over the same period. Gemfields
has boosted manufacturer and consumer confidence in its emeralds and rubies
through reliable supply, consistent grading, greater transparency and by
engaging with innovative traceability technology. Strong
and profitable business Gemfields
is a cash generative business. Based on unaudited numbers for the year to
December 2019, the Company was free cash flow generative and holds a positive
net cash position at the end of 2019. Since
2009, Gemfields has held 47 auctions surpassing US$1.2 billion in combined
auction revenue. In the 2018 annual results, the Group received revenues of $206
million and EBITDA of $58.9 million, a 29% EBITDA margin. The
recent suspension of the Zambian 15% export duty on precious gemstones is
anticipated to further improve the profitability of the business, whilst
revenues from MRM have reflected strong and consistent demand for Mozambican
rubies. Professional
and pioneering commercial auction platform Gemfields’
proprietary grading system and pioneering auction platform, together with
initiatives such as the use of blockchain in improving supply chain
traceability, have been instrumental in providing downstream markets with
confidence in Gemfields’ gemstones. These
initiatives have given manufacturers and the wider market improved visibility
of the availability, volume, quality and consistency of supply of rough
coloured gemstones being supplied by Kagem and MRM. This
has been a key component of Gemfields’ business model and has played an
important role in the growth of the global coloured gemstone sector. Deep
commitment to social licence and responsible mining Gemfields
takes a leading role in providing a positive impact for stakeholders through
its commitment to the Group’s three core values of Transparency, Legitimacy and
Integrity. Gemfields
carries a strong belief that coloured gemstones should benefit the host country
and host communities from which they originate. Responsible
sourcing for Gemfields includes incorporating industry-leading policies and
practices across its operations, transparency in the auction sales process, an
active role in industry working groups to modernise the sector, projects to
improve health, education and livelihoods for the communities around mine sites
and conservation efforts to protect Africa’s wildlife and biodiversity. Owner
of Fabergé Through
its outright ownership of Fabergé, an iconic and prestigious brand of
exceptional heritage, Gemfields can optimise the positioning, perception and
consumer awareness of coloured gemstones, advancing the Group’s wider “mine and
market” vision. Exploration
upside from its wider portfolio The
Group holds controlling interests in various other gemstones mining and
prospecting licences in Zambia, Mozambique, Ethiopia and Madagascar that form
part of the Company’s wider strategy of delivering long term value to its
shareholders. Experienced management team The
Gemfields senior management and Board is comprised of industry veterans in
their respective technical, supply chain and financial fields. Strategy The
Directors are focused on consolidating Gemfields’ position as a leading global
coloured gemstones supplier, with a clear African focus. The
Directors intend to continue to pursue an organic growth strategy driven
by a strong operational performance, healthy profitability and a commitment to
further developing a transparent, professional and responsible coloured
gemstones industry. Any future M&A opportunities will be carefully considered by the Board against appropriate financial and operational criteria.