Coal exploration and mining company, Canyon Coal opened a new canteen which is operated by local black, women-owned catering company, Kgaditse Prestige Events, at its Khanye Colliery in Bronkhorstspruit. Speaking at the opening, Menar Group Social Licensing Manager Xolile Mankayi explained that: “This enterprise development project aims to provide employees with convenient, affordable, healthy food onsite and empower local community members by supporting them with business development opportunities whenever possible.” He added that an important part of the mine’s Social and Labour Plan is to ensure that business opportunities are given to local community members. Canyon Coal Procurement Manager Carmia Pretorius explained that: “The canteen is a major improvement for Khanye Colliery, as there was no onsite eatery in place previously for employees to source meals from.” Read: The handover of Beestepan Agricultural High School At a cost of around R74 920, Canyon Coal established the fully equipped canteen comprising a full kitchen and a designated outside area where the employees can enjoy their meals. This enterprise development initiative saw the appointment of local business women Joyce Kgaditse and Angy Kgaditse, who are the co-directors of Kgaditse Prestige Events as the operators of the canteen and employing 3 to 5 personnel from the local communities. Angy Kagditse remarked: “I am very grateful for the support and guidance that Canyon Coal has given us throughout the process of the establishment of the beautiful facility. "Thank you to Canyon Coal for selecting us among many other local applicants and for having the confidence in us as a small female driven enterprise, we won’t let you down. "We look forward to being part of a company that is committed to local growth and development.” Representing local government, City of Tshwane Economic Development Mining Specialist, Thabang Ntshinga commended Canyon Coal for its efforts in supporting local businesses and ensuring that local community members share in the benefits from the mine. “This initiative undertaken by Canyon Coal should serve as an example to other mining companies as to how to nurture and support local businesses and economic development in a manner that is mutually beneficial to the community and the company,” she stated.