Resolute Mining has entered a definitive transaction documentation to sell the Ravenswood Gold Mine in Queensland to a consortium comprising a fund managed by specialist resources private equity manager EMR Capital Management, and Golden Energy and Resources. Resolute’s MD and CEO, John
Welborn, is delighted with a strongly value accretive transaction: “The sale of our
Ravenswood Gold Mine on the terms announced today provides the opportunity for
exceptional value for Resolute shareholders. We have strengthened our balance
sheet with a combination of immediate cash and the potential for future upside
as well as removing the requirement of a large near-term capital investment. “The divestment has strong strategic merit for Resolute. We have delivered on our objective of ensuring a new long-life future for Ravenswood under a world-class operator and can now focus our attention and energy on our African portfolio and the abundant opportunities our experience provides for further growth and value creation. Read: Resolute sees production increase from 2,092 oz to 105,293 oz “The transaction delivers
a fair share to all parties from the future value of the Ravenswood Expansion
Project and effectively balances risk and reward. Our modelling at current gold
prices demonstrates the expansion project at Ravenswood will be highly
successful for EMR Capital and GEAR, and that the maximum value of A$300
million will be generated for Resolute. “EMR Capital and GEAR are world-class mine developers and operators with outstanding track records of value generation. The EMR Capital and GEAR consortium are ideal parties to undertake the development of the Ravenswood Expansion Project. The upside sharing arrangement we have agreed aligns the interests of Resolute shareholders with those of EMR Capital and GEAR. Read: Resolute Mining signs 16 year power contract for Syama “Ravenswood has been a
consistent performer for Resolute for more than 15 years. Since acquisition in
2004, Resolute has mined and processed over 40 million tonnes of ore and
produced almost two million ounces of gold. “I congratulate the Resolute team, both past and present, for our performance at Ravenswood. We are proud of our achievements at Ravenswood and the significant economic benefits we have provided to the local community, the Queensland Government, and Resolute shareholders. “We are confident Resolute’s
legacy, and the interests of all stakeholders in Ravenswood, will be protected
and enhanced by the new consortium.” Resolute Mining will
receive cash proceeds of up to A$300 million comprising: The transaction has been structured to maximise Resolute Mining’s exposure to the future success of the Ravenswood Expansion Project while transferring the capital expenditure funding requirements and development obligation to a highly credentialed and experienced consortium with a strong relevant track record in successful project development. Read: Resolute Mining initiates strategic review of Bibiani During 2019, Resolute
Mining undertook a comprehensive strategic review of Ravenswood focused on
maximising returns from the Ravenswood Expansion Project and evaluating
development scenarios and funding requirements. The sale terms agreed
with the EMR Capital and GEAR consortium ensure that Resolute Mining retains
upside exposure with no requirement to fund the future capital expenditure
associated with the Ravenswood Expansion Project. A summary of the key
terms of the transaction is included as an appendix to this announcement. Completion of the
transaction is subject to standard conditions precedent for a transaction of
this nature including approvals from Australia’s Foreign Investment Review
Board, indicative Ministerial approval for the transfer of mining tenements,
Ministerial consent for the transfer of a project specific environmental
approval, approval from Resolute’s existing lending bank syndicate and
execution of deeds of assumption in relation to third party contracts. Based on the current
carrying value of the Ravenswood assets, Resolute Mining will record a gain on
the sale of Ravenswood in the Company’s accounts for the 12 months to 31
December 2020 (FY20). Resolute does not expect the transaction will create a
tax liability in the current tax accounting year. Cash received from the
transaction will be used to reduce debt and strengthen the Company’s balance
sheet. Resolute is committed to ensuring an orderly transition of ownership at Ravenswood and given the commitment of EMR Capital and GEAR to rapidly proceed with the Ravenswood Expansion Project, the transaction is not expected to result in any immediate material changes to employment or contract relationships at Ravenswood. Read more about gold Progression of the
Ravenswood Expansion Project development will continue to provide positive
economic benefits for the local community and suppliers as well as the
Queensland Government. Completion of the transaction is targeted to occur prior to 31 March 2020 subject to the satisfaction of conditions precedent (Financial Close). Resolute intends to revise its current year production and cost guidance based on Ravenswood gold production attributable to Resolute for FY20 as at Financial Close.