TSXV-listed Giyani Metals Corp. has started work on the feasibility study for its K.Hill manganese deposit in Botswana. Botswana –  Following the successful feasibility study bid from SRK Consulting, and joint bid from Tetra Tech and Royal IHC, Giyani Metals conducted a three-day site visit to K.Hill in late December 2019 for the team of consultants, who will be the project leads for their respective practices to survey the K.Hill project area. READ MORE: Giyani Metals receives EMP approval for Botswana manganese prospects According to Giyani Metals Corp. CEO Robin Birchall, the aim of the site visit was to provide them with first-hand experience of the location, terrain, infrastructure and various other aspects related to the overall project andwas a beneficial use of time that provided valuable input to the planning process for all participants. During the
site visit, the team surveyed the K.Hill deposit, and the surrounding area; to
consider potential locations for the mine, processing plant, waste rock and
tailings facilities. The team also assessed the area’s infrastructure to
develop an initial understanding of the requirements to build and operate the
K.Hill project. Additionally,
the team inspected the drill hole locations from the 2018 resource drilling
programme and considered potential drill hole locations for the infill drilling
programme for 2020. Another aspect
the team considered during the site visit was any potential benefits and
impacts of the K.Hill project on the town of Kanye, which will be examined in
detail in the environmental and social impact assessment to be run in parallel
with the feasibility study. Jacques du Toit, project director for Tetra Tech and Derk Hartman, director EPC & project delivery for IHC Mining, part of the Royal IHC Group, said the site visit confirmed that Giyani has a unique opportunity to benefit from some of the best infrastructure in Southern Africa which includes well-maintained roads and close access to the robust power supply network that also feeds Debswana’s nearby Jwaneng diamond mine. "Established supply routes and power will enable a fast and cost-efficient development of the K.Hill manganese project.” Mike Beare, project manager for SRK noted that the K.Hill deposit has a significant history and the new process route will open a new chapter in this history.