A top United Nations official in West Africa and the Sahel has updated the Security Council describing an “unprecedented" rise in terrorist violence across the region. The region has experienced a devastating surge in terrorist attacks against civilian and military targets,” Mohamed Ibn Chambas, United Nations (UN) Special Representative and Head of the UN Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), told the Council in its first formal meeting of the year. “The humanitarian consequences are alarming”, he spelled out. Read more about mining in West Africa In presenting his latest
report, Chambas painted a picture of relentless attacks on civilian and
military targets that he said, have “shaken public confidence”. A surge in casualties The UNOWAS chief
elaborated on terrorist-attack casualties in Burkina Faso Mali and Niger, which
have leapt five-fold since 2016 – with more than 4,000 deaths reported in 2019
alone as compared to some 770 three years earlier. “Most significantly,” he
said, “the geographic focus of terrorist attacks has shifted eastwards from
Mali to Burkina Faso and is increasingly threatening West African coastal
States”. He also flagged that the
number of deaths in Burkina Faso jumped from about 80 in 2016 to over 1,800
last year. And displacement has
grown ten-fold to about half a million, on top of some 25,000 who have sought
refuge in other countries. Chambas explained that
“terrorist attacks are often deliberate efforts by violent extremists” to
engage in illicit activities that include capturing weapons and illegal
artisanal mining. Intertwined challenges Terrorism, organized
crime and intercommunal violence are often intertwined, especially in
peripheral areas where the State’s presence is weak. “In those places, extremists
provide safety and protection to populations, as well as social services in
exchanged for loyalty”, he informed the Council, echoing the Secretary-General
in saying that for these reasons, “counter-terrorism responses must focus on
gaining the trust and support of local populations”. The Special
Representative outlined that governments, local actors, regional organizations
and the international community are mobilizing across the region to respond to
these challenges. On 21 December, the
ECOWAS Heads of State summit “adopted a 2020-2024 action plan to eradicate
terrorism in the sub-region”, he said. Calling “now” the time
for action, Chambas drew attention to the importance of supporting regional
Governments by prioritizing “a cross-pillar approach at all levels and across
all sectors”. Turning to farmer-herder
clashes, which he maintained are “some of the most violent local conflicts in
the region”, the UNOWAS chief highlighted that 70% of West Africa’s population
depend on agriculture and livestock-rearing for a living, underscoring the
importance of peaceful coexistence. The Special Representative
also pointed to climate change, among other factors, as increasingly
exacerbating farmer-herder conflicts. “The impact of climate
change on security also spawns a negative relationship between climate change,
social cohesion, irregular migration and criminality in some places”, he
upheld. Stemming negative
security trends The UNOWAS chief noted
that in the months ahead, Togo, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and
Niger would be democratically electing their leaders and maintained that
“all-too-worrying” security trends must not distract from political
developments. “Unresolved grievance,
incomplete national reconciliation processes and sentiments of manipulation of
institutions and processes carry risks of tensions and manifestations of
political violence”, he warned. In the months ahead, Chambas
stressed that UNOWAS would continue to work with partners on the national and
regional levels to promote consensus and inclusiveness in the elections. “As UNOWAS’ mandate is renewed, we count on the Council’s continued full support”, concluded the Special Representative.