NYSE / TSX-listed Newmont has refreshed its brand, name and logo to reflect its strong and stable foundation following two historic gold transactions in 2019. The company’s refreshed brand is being unveiled as Newmont enters its centenary year in May of 2020 and will begin its next century of performance, value creation and sustainability leadership on May 2, 2021. Read: Newmont Goldcorp reaches agreement to sell Red Lake “We successfully completed two historic transactions in 2019, which have transformed Newmont into a truly international organization with an unmatched portfolio of assets and prospects in top-tier jurisdictions around the world,” says Tom Palmer, President and CEO. “As this company has done many times in the past, Newmont has demonstrated its ability to adapt to change, which is truly a hallmark of our success over the last 100 years. "Updating our brand represents a natural step as we approach the next 100 years in Newmont’s long and proud legacy of operating discipline, profitable growth, environmental stewardship, and developing the industry’s best talent.” Read more about gold mining Approaching 100 years as a global leader in mining, the “Newmont” name is well recognized and has been an iconic brand among the S&P 500 and various indexes. The updated Newmont logo leverages the gold triangle from the previous logo – which represents the apex of the industry and the pinnacle of leadership – to anchor the strength and stability conveyed by the new logo. “While our proven strategy and core values remain key to our ongoing success, we’ve updated and adapted our brand to reflect our position as a transformed business and the world’s leading gold company,” adds Palmer. Newmont has the strongest and most sustainable portfolio of operations, projects and exploration prospects in the gold sector. These assets allow the company to sequence profitable projects in its unmatched pipeline to sustain stable gold production over a decades-long time horizon in top-tier jurisdictions around the globe.