Tharisa CEO Phoevos Pouroulis says: “A solid operational performance from mining and processing lead to a stable quarter despite the adverse impact of weather, and the well-publicised Eskom power shortages,” “Whilst
Tharisa benefits from our overall low usage and stand-by capacity, the
unprecedented moves to “Stage 6” load-shedding and consequent power reductions,
did provide disruption to the processing plants’ stability. “Overall,
plant performance was commendable. “Mining, accounting for the weather-related impact, was in line with expectations and we should see a build up towards the latter half of the year. Read more about mining in southern Africa “Our co-product model remains robust as record PGM prices were received. However, we remain concerned about the prevailing low chrome and ferrochrome prices, which has had a negative effect on the chrome industry. “Our
progress in Zimbabwe is continuing as planned.” Safety Safety
is a core value and Tharisa continues to strive for zero harm at its
operations. A LTIFR of 0.21 per 200 000 man hours worked was recorded at the
end of the quarter. Mining Reef
tonnes mined totalled 1 143.0 kt, which when compared to the previous comparable
quarter in December 2018 was up 4.8% but lower than the previous quarter ended
September 2019, as inclement weather impacted the open pit operation, resulting
in a ROM ‘opportunity loss ‘ of over 230 kt. Rainfall
during December was 137% higher than the previously recorded highest rainfall
in the five prior years. The
lower reef tonnage had a direct impact on reef milled but was up when compared
to December 2018 at 1 247.1 kt. The
stripping ratio improved against all measurements at 10.9 m3. Processing Stand by power generating capacity mitigated the impact of Eskom load-shedding on the processing plants although the increase to “Stage 6” and the resultant electricity curtailment did result in an overall reduction in tonnes milled of 11.2 kt which had a further impact on overall chrome production. PGM
production was 34.4 koz (6E basis) from a rougher feed grade of 1.41 g/t and
recoveries at 82.2%. Chrome
concentrate production was 342.5 kt, comprising 261.0 kt of metallurgical grade
and 81.5 kt of specialty grade. Third
party chrome production was 62.3 kt, as the K3 plant was closed during
December. Market
update Our co-product business model has benefitted from record PGM prices, with the average PGM contained metal basket price for the quarter at US$1 406/oz (ZAR20 745/oz), with palladium and rhodium continuing to be the main driver of the increased basket price. The average chrome price received for the quarter was US$145/t with current spot trading at US$133/t, levels the company believes are unsustainable in the long-term, but expectations are for chrome concentrate prices to remain at these levels during the current quarter, with some potential for improvement into the third quarter. Outlook Tharisa’s
FY2020 production guidance remains at 155 koz to 165 koz PGMs (6E basis) and
1.45 Mt to 1.55 Mt of chrome concentrates. The co-product model remains robust and we continue to enjoy the benefits of record PGM basket prices as we ramp up production in both PGM and chrome concentrates.