DRC Mining Week to focus on battery metals, finance and juniors The DRC’s Minister of Mines, the Honourable Prof Willy Kitobo Samsoni, will address the DRC Mining Investment Breakfast next week, Wednesday 5 February, in Cape Town. It will gather financiers, technology suppliers and successful mining operators who have been part of the sector in the DRC for many years, thanks to this country’s generous reserves of copper, gold, diamonds, cobalt, lithium and coltan amongst others. The growing numbers of electric vehicles has also rapidly increased the demand for strategic battery metals. Also attending the Mining Investment Breakfast in Cape Town next week will be the organisers of the DRC Mining Week exhibition and conference, taking place in Lubumbashi from 17-19 June. The Mining Minister Samsoni has already been confirmed to address the opening session of this year’s event in the heart of the Copperbelt. It will be the 16th edition of the event, which has grown and expanded substantially over the last few years.   International pavilions Says DRC Mining Week event director Elodie Delagneau: “with the support of the Ministry of Mines, the Federation of Congolese Enterprises (FEC) and strategic partners, DRC Mining Week will gather some 5000 local and international mining stakeholders and influencers in the public and private sector doing business in the DRC.” Read: Lubumbashi prepares for expanded DRC Mining Week She adds: “the global interest in the huge potential of the DRC’s commodities sector is clear with more and more country pavilions at the show over the last few years. This year, Germany and Zimbabwe will return to Lubumbashi, amongst at least six international pavilions, including China, South Africa, UK, and France.” Other early confirmations of high-level industry expert speakers for the event include Amedeo Anniciello, CEO, Standard Bank, DRC, Gustave Nzeng Rubuz, Chairman Board of Directors, KCC – Glencore, DRC and Richard Robinson, MD, Alphamin Bisie Mines. New at the event this year will be a dedicated Finance and Investment Day to provide insights into the availability of funds and capital to penetrate this challenging but extremely promising strategic market. Another first are the Women in Mining session and Junior Mining Forum that will focus on understanding investors’ mind-sets towards junior mining and discuss how well prepared junior miners are to compete for funding in the DRC, compared to South Africa, Australia and Canada. Read more about mining in central Africa Other conference highlights will include a deep dive into commodities to emphasise the DRC’s growing reputation as a sought-after mining investment destination, particularly with regards to battery metals. Says DRC Mining Week event director Delagneau: “with the surge in the global demand for rechargeable batteries and electric vehicles, the DRC is fast becoming a provider of choice, thanks to the volume and high grade quality of its cobalt and other strategic metals.”   Tech, digitisation, energy Technologies and innovation is an exciting session at DRC Mining Week this year. Other sessions will include discussions on developing enablers for value addition in the region; processing and beneficiation and tools for a sustainable value chain. The conference will also look to the future, specifically what the sector may look like in 2050 and the speed of digitisation of mining in the region. The challenges and opportunities in the provision of energy to mining operations is always an important topic and delegates will hear the latest updates on power projects in DRC, diversifying the energy mix, relooking at operating models to maximise local production and an expert panel discussion will unpack the issue of reducing disruptions to ensure security on the mines. The sessions on policies and regulation will unpack how the DRC can improve its business climate to attract more FDI; focus on governance issues and creating a responsible mining culture, traceability and tracking; local skills development and creating a “Made in the DRC” brand and discuss the benefits of legalising artisanal mining in the country. DRC Mining Week is organised by Clarion Events Africa, a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy, mining and agriculture sectors. Other well-known events by Spintelligent include African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa, Future Energy East Africa, Future Energy Nigeria, Africa Mining Forum and Nigeria Mining Week. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group. DRC Mining Week: Site visit: 16 June 2020Pre-conference Power Focus Day: 17 June 2020Expo and conference: 17-19 June 2020Location: The Pullman Grand Karavia Hotel, Lubumbashi, DRC Website: http://www.drcminingweek.com    Twitter:  https://twitter.com/drcminingweek   Facebook:  https://www.facebook.com/DRC-Mining-Week-156193451406496/  LinkedIN: https://www.linkedin.com/groups/4922857 Media contact: Senior communications manager: Annemarie RoodbolOffice: +27 21 700 3558Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com