Environmental organisation GRID-Arendal with support from the UN Environment Program has launched the world’s first publicly-accessible global database of mine tailings storage facilities. The database, the Global Tailings Portal, was built by Norway-based GRID-Arendal as part of the Investor Mining and Tailings Safety Initiative, which is led by the Church of England Pensions Board and the Swedish National Pension Funds’ Council on Ethics, with support from the UN Environment Program. The initiative is backed by funds with more than US$13 trillion under management. READ MORE: Tailings management: Zero tolerance for failure not negotiable Professor Elaine Baker from the University of Sydney School of Geosciences is director of the GRID-Arendal office at the university and has been a driving force in the foundation of the database, which was launched at Westminster Abbey, London. “This
portal could save lives,” said Professor Baker, who is senior expert at
GRID-Arendal globally. “Tailing
dams are getting bigger and bigger. Mining companies have found most of the
highest-grade ores and are now mining lower-grade ones, which create more
waste. With this information, the entire industry can work towards reducing dam
failures in the future.” The release of the Global Tailings Portal coincides with the one-year anniversary of the tailings dam collapse in Brumadinho, Brazil, which killed 270 people. After that disaster, a group of institutional investors led by the Church of England Pensions Board asked 726 of the world’s largest mining companies to disclose details about their tailings dams. Many of the companies complied, and the information they released has been incorporated into the database. READ MORE: Global Tailings Review launches public consultation Until
now, there has been no central database detailing the location and quantity of
the mining industry’s liquid and solid waste, known as tailings. The waste is
typically stored in embankments called tailings dams, which have periodically
failed with devastating consequences for communities, wildlife and ecosystems. The
database will allow users to view detailed information on more than 1 900
tailings dams, categorised by location, company, dam type, height, volume and
risk, among other factors. “Most of this information has never before been publicly available,” said Kristina Thygesen, GRID-Arendal’s programme leader for geological resources and a member of the team that worked on the portal. When GRID-Arendal began in-depth research on mine tailings dams in 2016, very little data was accessible. In a 2017 report on tailings dams, co-published by GRID and the UN Environment Program, one of the key recommendations was to establish an accessible public-interest database of tailings storage facilities. “This database brings a new level of transparency to the mining industry, which will benefit regulators, institutional investors, scientific researchers, local communities, the media and the industry itself,” Thygesen said. Mining Review Africa will be hosting a live panel discussion on Tuesday 4 February at 7:30am at Investing in African Mining Indaba where Fraser Alexander, Knight Piesold and Webber Wentzel will discuss the importance of integrated Tailings Storage Facility management, ensuring that we continue to attract investment into our industry while containing risk. 