The development of the junior mining and emerging mining sectors is an important part of growing and sustaining the mining industry. As one of the world’s largest investment events, Mining Indaba attracts junior mining companies seeking investment opportunities. The 2020 Investing in African Mining Indaba will bring together more than 600 global investors and corporate development teams, and 280 executives from junior mining companies. Mining Indaba provides a platform for junior
miners to promote their projects and raise their profile to global investors
and international media; to build relationships amongst a high-profile
investment community; and gain a better understanding of what investors are
looking for, with months’ worth of meetings conducted over the week. Tom Quinn, Mining Indaba’s Head of Content
says, “One of our primary goals as event organisers is to connect junior miners
with capital. We remain dedicated to helping junior mining companies secure
funding through a number of avenues”. Six ways Mining Indaba helps junior mining companies secure funding: 1. The junior mining showcase: a dedicated exhibition space for junior and mid-tier mining companies Strategically placed next to the Investor Lounge, the showcase brings junior miners close to capital holders, encouraging organic interactions. This space offers maximum visibility to investors through branded booths and an opportunity to showcase exciting projects in Africa. Restricted morning access for mining executives and investors provides an intimate and private atmosphere to conduct confidential meetings. This year, we have added extra booths, creating additional capacity for junior mining companies. Read: Key highlights for Mining Indaba 2020 2. The junior mining forum: promotes insightful discussions on mining markets Through expert discussions with investors, analysts, junior miners and end users, the Junior Mining Forum dedicates a stage to explore factors driving investment decisions within African mining markets. The insights gained from the forum assist junior miners in thinking about how to increase appeal to investors. Top discussions at this year’s Mining Indaba include: “are we reaching a long-run bull market in gold?”, “are junior gold projects in west Africa attractive to investors?”, “kickstarting exploration activity in southern Africa” and “can the SA PGM market turnaround?”. 3. The Investor Relations (IR) service: connects companies to suitable investors The personalised IR service, which is available to every exhibiting company, helps facilitate investment goals at Mining Indaba. Using in-depth knowledge of mining financial markets, the IR team builds a comprehensive understanding of each company’s investment proposition - at the point of registration, the investment criteria of over 600 investments is captured to match mining companies with those investors most suited to them. The IR team uses this information to help arrange meetings with only the most suitable investors, financiers and analysts. Read more about investment 4. Special delegate rates: encourage attendance of junior mining companies Mining Indaba continues to offer junior mining
companies one of the lowest rates available, making participation in the event
and access to investment opportunities more accessible. 5. The Investment battlefield: a platform to pitch exciting emerging projects in Africa The investment battlefield elevates the profiles of junior mining companies by providing a platform to pitch their projects to the global finance community live on stage. Successful participants benefit from new connections with high-profile investors and international media coverage. The investor judges also offer direct feedback on how to maximise appeal to attract funding, significantly increasing chances of junior miners securing capital. 6. Business matchmaking: facilitates meaningful business connections The Mining Indaba’s leading business
matchmaking service allows attending companies to filter through over 6,000
delegates - quickly and easily - to find top business matches. This service
uses intelligent matchmaking to facilitate meaningful interactions with
appropriate financiers. Tom Quinn adds, “We are excited to host this year’s junior mining companies at the 2020 Mining Indaba and look forward to providing a platform to discuss investment drivers and emerging projects in junior mining markets.”