Today, progressive miners are restructuring their operations with digital technologies carrying the burden of their day-to-day tasks. This enables engineers to focus on strategic projects and on enhancing productivity. Technologies from other industries, as diverse as natural language processing, bioelectric sensors and commercial drones are being used in a range of applications from health and safety to asset management, all with great impact. By Gareth Halstead, subject matter expert: mineral processing, DataProphet Understanding the
challenges in driving digital innovation in mining Like any paradigm shift, there is an initial resistance to innovation and the change it entails. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 1, 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Operational challenges such as equipment breakdowns, design problems, and even political instability are common distractions to the complex task of digital transformation. Read: Digitisation – revitalising operations and local communities Resources that would
be allocated to the deployment and implementation of new technologies are
re-allocated to address these issues. Whilst larger mining houses may benefit
from dedicated teams to evaluate and deploy new technologies; mid-tier and
junior miners should look to partner with technology vendors for support.
Either way, mining houses need to find a way to leverage these disruptive
technologies to improve their competitive advantage. Making a significant
impact Despite the
challenges, there are a number of machine learning and AI applications making a
significant impact in this industry today: For a solution to be described as AI in its true sense, it needs to be integrated into the data environment to continuously learn and update its understanding of the environment. Watch: How company culture should adopt digital technology Many existing AI solutions sit on a continuum from being fully integrated with continuous learning, to simple models built off a static dump of data. Unless prescriptive, these AI technologies are effectively advanced analytics. Can digital technology help mines in Africa to overcome common challenges? Remote mines in
developing countries face additional challenges to those in the developed
world. These include the availability of spare parts and the ability to attract
highly skilled engineers. Developments in
automation and intelligent control enables engineers to monitor and prescribe
changes to process parameters remotely—making the necessary changes from anywhere
in the world. At the same time, it is important to ensure local talent is
upskilled through e-learning programmes and simulators. How does the future
look? Having passed the peak
of the last super cycle, mining companies are looking for efficiencies in their
operations. Digital technologies, such as AI, present a unique opportunity for
miners to improve their operations and achieve these efficiencies. Mines and beneficiation plants will be fully autonomous in the future. Engineers will be free from the burden of day-to-day operations and will monitor operations remotely, allowing them to spend more time on strategic improvements. The ability to prescribe optimum control parameters, using an expert execution system (EES) from remote locations, will also lead to safer plants and enhance production outputs. Health and safety will be improved further by automating and using machine learning to better understand the inherent risks in the operation. The future is about intelligent, autonomous and highly optimised mining operations—with an eye on extending operations outside of earth's orbit.