“We want to put some life in Nigeria Mining Week and we want to deepen what happens.” These were the words of Olamilekan Adegbite, Nigeria’s Minister of Mines and Steel Development, who was speaking at the Nigeria Mining Week pre-event press conference to in Abuja in October this year. Adegbite kick-started the momentum of engagement with the industry that was followed through during the two day event: From his dynamic keynote speech to his continued presence and interaction with the various stakeholders at the event along with the Minister of State, Dr. Uchechukwu Ogah. Both ministers were in no hurry to leave this year’s opening day, enthusiastically joining a VIP tour of the exhibition. During the CEO
Roundtable they met executives from various major and mid-tier mining companies
and discussed the key challenges of the Nigerian market and the Ministry’s
ongoing initiatives. “Nigeria has only been able to attract 0.12% out of the 5% share of the exploration investment share flowing into the West African region” said Adegbite in his keynote address during the opening session. “To change this narrative, the ministry intends to partner with a broad spectrum of stakeholders in the industry to deepen the reforms and foster a conducive ecosystem for private sector investments. The ministry assures all prospective investors that the Federal Government will provide the necessary support for them to thrive in the sector.” Ongoing industry support Going forward, the ministry will continue its endorsement of the event and will remain the official hosts of the event.   “Nigeria Mining Week has grown by leaps and bounds,” stated a very pleased Alhaji. Kabir Mohammed Kankara, president of the Miners Association of Nigeria (MAN), the  founders and organisers of the event along with iPAD Nigeria and PwC Nigeria. He continues: “The fourth edition of the event hosted 1,159 attendees from 17 countries, 38 sponsors and exhibitors which included some state governments and their agencies, equipment manufacturers, marketers and other industry service providers. It also had in attendance 65 world class conference speakers and 676 visitors. “The huge success of Nigeria Mining Week is a clear
indication that the mining sector has come to play a major role in President
Buhari’s economic diversification agenda.” The broad support for the event from the industry
was evident in the sponsorships. One of the platinum partners was the Mineral Sector Support for Economic
Diversification Project or
MinDiver, whose objective is to enhance the mining
sector's contribution to the economy by strengthening key institutions,
improving information infrastructure and knowledge, and fostering domestic
investment in the sector. Nigerian mining company Emotan Global Ventures also joined the event
as a platinum sponsor.  

This year’s gold sponsors at Nigeria Mining Week were AG Vision, Barron, HMD
Mining, ITM, Nasarawa State and Niger State. Other notable industry
stakeholders in attendance were the Mining Cadastre Office (MCO), the Nigeria
Geological Survey Agencies (NGSA) NEXIM Bank, NIPC, NACCIMA, ACCI, members of
the National Assembly, the Executive Governors of Kebbi and Nassarawa States,
representatives of other state governments and their agencies and the Royal
Fathers. A full conference report, compiled by event partner PwC Nigeria, can be downloaded from the event website Be a part of West Africa’s premier mining event in 2020. Contact: Event manager: Sabrina Tab Sponsorship and exhibition: Kuda Tsingano Marketing: Caroline Plateaux Conference and workshop programmes: Audrey Bading Office telephone: +27 21 7003500 Website