With the advent of Industry 4.0 set to change the face of industry and production, SEW-EURODRIVE has a range of solutions for its concept of the Lean Sm@rt Factory. This is based on the paradigm shift introduced by new technologies such as big data, embedded computing, the Internet of Things (IoT), and cloud computing in the production environment. Read other tech news articles here The MOVIGEAR mechatronic
drive system from SEW-EURODRIVE is designed for flexible use across various
communication infrastructures. It is ideal for decentralised field
applications. Features include a compact design and optimal integration of
components with permanent-field synchronous motor, gear unit, and integrated
electronics. MOVIGEAR is especially
tailored for efficient use in the general materials-handling sector. It is
available in two sizes and three electrical performance classes for a total of
four communication variants. Energy savings of up to 50% are possible due to
the seamless interplay between the IE4-rated motor, efficient gear unit, and
integrated electronics. “Perfectly-matched components, combined with the energy optimisation of the overall system, facilitate high system efficiency. These features make the MOVIGEAR mechatronic drive solution a cost-effective, power-optimised, total solution,” SEW-EURODRIVE MD Raymond Obermeyercomments. Flexible, compact and
intelligent MOVIDRIVE B drive inverters save space in the control cabinet. In
addition, they are equipped with integrated IPOSplus positioning and sequence
control as standard features. These inverters are ideal for asynchronous AC or
synchronous servo drives. Additional features are a broad power range from 0.55 kW to 250 kW, and a high overload capacity. Based on a modular concept, the MOVIDRIVE B inverter is ideal to improve the flexibility and efficiency of a range of applications. READ MORE: 4IR: The future of mining is now SEW‑EURODRIVE also offers the freely programmable MOVI‑PLC motion and logic controller for solving complex tasks in a flexible
manner. These scalable controllers are an ideal solution platform due to their
universal operation and functionality. Comprehensive interfaces are available
for the external periphery, and for visualisation purposes to fully automate
complete machines. For fast and simple
start-up, users can take advantage of preconfigured program modules for many
applications. The standard programming languages FBD, LD, IL, and structured
text ensure greater flexibility. MOVI-PLC provides the drive functionality
necessary to match any specific application. It can be used wherever ‘smart’
drive solutions are required. “The basic concept behind Industry 4.0 is to leverage information technology in order to integrate business and engineering processes for more flexible, efficient, and time-independent production in a range of applications and industries. At the same time, high quality and lower costs are a given. SEW-EURODRIVE’s approach combines the basic tenets of Industry 4.0 with its benchmark-setting solutions and concepts,” Obermeyer concludes.