Rwanda is leading the way in regional mining ambitions in East and Central Africa. This was evident from large number of delegates that attended the first ever East and Mining Forum, held in Kigali, Rwanda in October last year. Speaking at the opening session, Rwandan prime minister, Dr Édouard Ngirente, said that the private sector will play a big role in developing and growing the continent’s mining sector. “To maximise the benefits of mining, African countries need to come together and think about how mining can contribute better to local development. This can be achieved by making sure workers and communities see real benefits from large-scale industrial mining,” he said. 730 Attendees from 42 countries at the event were
not disappointed in the two-day conference and exhibition. The East and Central African Mining Forum is an
ambitious initiative by the Rwandan government to not only showcase the
investment opportunities and success stories in its own mining sector but to
promote the region as a hub for exploration, extraction and beneficiation
projects. “There are many projects that are investor-ready in Rwanda,” Hon. Francis Gatare, CEO of the Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (RMB) and conveners of the event, noted during a regional ministerial panel discussion on “Increasing regional mineral trade and investment”. He further added that: “The industry (in Africa) has been dominated by artisanal miners on large scale, not by choice but by circumstances. Lack of investment capital is one of those big circumstances.” Gatare’s fellow
panellists were
Dr Andu Ezbon Adde, Undersecretary, Ministry of Mining, Republic of South Sudan;
Gety Mpanu Mpanu Deputy Chief of Staff of The Head of State in charge of
Infrastructure, Mineral Resources, Hydrocarbons, Energy and PT-NTIC,
Presidency, DRC; and Polite Kambamura,
Deputy Minister of Mines and Mining Development, Republic of Zimbabwe. Some
of the continent’s most successful and exciting mining houses such as Glencore,
Ivanhoe, TechMet, Montero Mining, AfriTin, and Walkabout Resources as well as
leading industry service providers also joined in the event’s discussions;
including leading global law firm Herbert Smith Freehills (HSF), Adam Smith
International who shared their experiences in the field, current success
stories and future plans in the region. Summing up the event, Mining Review Africa Editor-in-Chief Laura Cornish said: “If you’re looking for a solid investment opportunity in Africa, then Rwanda is the place to be: Beautiful country, beautiful people, beautiful assets and a will to be bigger and better that is bound to materialise.” Interested in being part of East and Central African Mining Forum 2020? Preparations are already underway for the event to return to Kigali in October 2020. To partner contact: Event director: Elodie Delagneau Sponsorship and exhibition: Benjamin Weinheimer Marketing: Caroline Plateaux Conference and workshop programmes: Zayeen Daniels  Office telephone: +27 21 7003500 Website