Within the mining and minerals sector, investors are increasingly integrating environmental, social and governance, or ESG, into their investment process to help secure capital during fundraising, identify risks during due diligence, capitalise on opportunities post-acquisition, and facilitate information disclosure in exit. It seems that the rise
in responsible investment is inexorable. The Principles for Responsible Investment
(PRI) now boasts over 2 300 signatories, representing close to a dizzying $90
trillion in assets under management. However, Aidan Davy, COO
of the International Council on Mining and Minerals (ICMM) believes that
increased opacity is required. “Investors rarely
disclose specific details about their internal processes for integrating ESG
factors into investment decision-making, and the relative weight assigned to
ESG factors is completely opaque,” he says. “A double standard
applies to disclosures. Investors express frustration with mining companies’
inability to provide readily comparable data on an asset-by-asset basis to
facilitate the investment decision-making process. “However, they are typically coy about how they use the information – their descriptions of how they integrate ESG factors vary from science to art to alchemy. "So, mining companies are likely to be subject to increasing demands for ESG data and details of how they factor ESG issues into their allocation of capital but can’t expect reciprocity from investors in terms of disclosure of their investment processes.” He believes that while the growth in responsible investment implies dramatic progress over the past decade, much greater line of sight on how ESG issues are integrated into investment decision-making is required if this is to become a driver of responsible behaviour on the part of companies. “I also believe the
investment community needs to pay much more attention to the quality of
management of ESG issues rather than data disclosures that are often of dubious
value, and move beyond a narrow focus on risks with a direct and tangible
connection to enterprise value. Lastly, they also need to find a way to give
credit for social value-creation,” he adds. Regulatory
non-compliance and perceived failures to implement and uphold ethical practices
have led to a spate of litigation on ESG-related matters against mining
companies, particularly on health and safety and environmental issues. “Activist shareholders
staging protests at AGMs and other company meetings has also become a real
concern for mining businesses,” Jonathan Brooks, mining lawyer at Field Fisher,
explains. “Extractives companies
are facing sharper scrutiny of the way they handle various environmental
issues, including pollution, tailings management, habitat protection and site
remediation; and social concerns, such as the rights of indigenous people,
health and safety, security and workforce rights.” The growing emphasis
on ethics and sustainability is being driven by customers, investors,
regulators and industry initiatives – as well as a genuine desire among some
companies to conduct their operations in a sustainable way. Various influential
international bodies have set, or are in the process of setting standards that
mining companies are now being held to. One such organisation
is The London Metals Exchange (LME). Mid 2019 the LME launched a formal
market-wide consultation on proposed rules for the application of responsible
sourcing principles to all LME-listed brands. “Our comprehensive
market engagement exercise has revealed strong support for the LME taking
action on this important topic,” Matthew Chamberlain, LME CEO, comments. “Based on the
constructive feedback of civil society organisations, we have enhanced our
transparency requirements, and at the same time, we have respected the views of
producers who have called for more achievable timelines and a clearly-defined
reporting process.” One emerging challenge
is the responsible sourcing of conflict minerals. Keeping climate change within
manageable bounds will require a wide adoption of green technologies. Many of these technologies, however, rely on the use of minerals sourced in high-risk areas with poor human rights practises. The most significant example of this being cobalt, an essential component in the cathode of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries powering electric vehicles, sourced mainly in the Democratic Republic of Congo. However, while supply chain governance for certain minerals, including tin, tungsten, tantalum, gold and diamonds, is improving, such initiatives have not yet been expanded to include most of the minerals and metals central to green energy technologies. As a result, a wide array of stakeholders are calling for companies in the sector to go beyond legislative requirements and implement a broader approach to responsible sourcing. According to a report
late last year from VigeoEiris, half of mining and metals companies integrate
ESG objectives in their remuneration policy. “The sector is showing leadership
on the integration of ESG risk factors into its Corporate Governance Strategy
and internal risk processes,” the report says. “Almost 50% of M&M
companies in the sector take into consideration CSR issues when determining
variable remuneration of their executives, in comparison to only 17% of
companies in VigeoEiris’ universe.” Mining Indaba 2020 will be hosting unmissable pioneering insights and genuine thought-leading discussions with industry heavyweights from across the value chain on the subject of environmental, social and corporate governance. They have highlighted
the top must-attend sessions: Tuesday: full day Main Stage: Monday: 12:00 – 12:40 DRC
focus Examining the DRC: The
rise of cobalt, copper & gold, and where next for the mining code and
mining under the new administration? Wednesday: 11:15 – 12:00 – WGC
Deep Dive: Responsible Gold Mining Principles (RGMPs) & Sustainability 12:00 – 13:00
Artisanal Mining focus 14:00 – 14:50
Panel: Climate Change & Sustainability focus