Following the resounding success of the 15th DRC Mining Week (DMW) last year, the organisers are expanding the facilities for the 2020 edition to receive even more visitors and exhibitors to participate in the region’s most successful mining event. “It was an excellent decision to participate in DMW. It was an impressive conference and exhibition with exciting contacts,” says Helmut Schgeiner, technical director of Germany’s Mechanical Engineering Industry Association (VDMA) and organiser of the first official German pavilion, at this year’s event. Read: DRC Mining Week 2020: The countdown has begun The German Pavilion will be amongst at least six international pavilions,  including China, South Africa, UK, Zimbabwe and France, that will return to the event in Lubumbashi on 17 – 19 June 2020. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 12, 2019   Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here For the past three years, the South African Department of Trade and Industry (the dti) has successfully sponsored and introduced South African specialist suppliers to the Copperbelt mining industry to showcase their technology and services at the event. “DRC Mining Week is an excellent platform for mining companies,” states the dti’s Trade Facilitator and organiser of the South African pavilion, Mpho Jonas. “DRC Mining Week conference and exhibition has been evolving and developing since the first event 16 years ago,” adds event director Elodie Delagneau. “At this year’s edition, we hosted more than 4 900 people. This is just one example of how this event has grown into a huge platform, serving the entire mining value chain, and is now literally bursting at the seams. "So it is time for some expansion and a bit of a facelift, adapting to the growing numbers and the expectations and needs of our clients to be able to network, learn, make deals and find business partners in one place.” Expanded expo space Not only will DRC Mining Week 2020 have larger conference facilities for its three-day programme, extended exhibition space and additional international pavilions, the organiser, Clarion Events Africa, is also planning a dedicated Women in Mining session, Junior Mining Forum, trade briefings and a Golf Day sponsored by Comexas. The event will furthermore boast a dedicated session on the growing sector of battery metals, a special focus on China, investment and training for ASMs. The programme will feature DRC’s strategic mining provinces of Haut Katanga, Lualaba, Ituru, Kivu and Bas-Congo. More than 230 sponsors and exhibitors from more than 45
countries will partner with next year’s DRC event, while some 600+ mining executives
will attend the conference and more than 5 000 visitors are expected to attend
the expo. Standard Bank, a longstanding partner of the event, is
returning to the 2020 edition as the venue and opening ceremony sponsor. Event director: Elodie Delagneau Sponsorship and exhibition: Jean-Tite Oloumoussie Marketing: Caroline Plateaux Conference and workshop programmes: Audrey Bading Office telephone: +27 21 700 3500 Website