Environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters rapidly rose up the corporate agenda in 2019, such that ESG is now a mainstream issue across all areas of corporate life, including in mergers and acquisitions (M&A). Leading global law firm Herbert Smith Freehills' M&A in 2020: The New Normal report takes a closer look at this key trend that has come to the fore in the past 12 months due to increased awareness of climate change, unease with globalisation, and pressure from activists and consumers. Read more about the environment The report highlights the environmental, social and governance risks and reputational issues that dealmakers need to be mindful of in any buy or sell situation. "Environmental, social and governance  matters are now mainstream and can no longer be considered an afterthought in M&A decision-making," says Gavin Davies, Head of Global M&A at Herbert Smith Freehills. "They demand heightened attention on M&A transactions, across all sectors. Thorough  environmental, social and governance due diligence and post-transaction risk management should now be part of the M&A practitioner's toolkit." The report also focuses on three other key M&A trends from 2019 that lawyers at Herbert Smith Freehills expect will continue in 2020: "Despite a sustained environment of geopolitical uncertainty, overall M&A activity in 2019 remained healthy. That said, the market continues to adopt ever-greater care around deal execution against the "new normal" backdrop of potential deal disruption. It is essential that dealmakers continue to plan carefully to minimise the timetable and risk to completion," says Caroline Rae, Herbert Smith Freehills M&A partner and a co-author of the report. The report also provides insights from Herbert Smith Freehills' lawyers around Africa, Asia, Australia, China, Europe, the Middle East and the UK on regional activity in 2019, and the outlook for 2020. The report additionally identifies a number of drivers for cross-border M&A opportunities including: an uptick in stressed and distressed M&A as market conditions become increasingly challenging for particular sectors in certain jurisdictions; end-of-cycle transacting, as companies look to divest non-core or underperforming divisions and refresh focus on their core business; and deal making across all sectors that continues to be driven by tech disruption, including through minority and venture investing, and strategic partnerships.