Sibanye-Stillwater has been commended for its climate change action and disclosure, achieving an ‘A’ rating by CDP, a non-profit global environmental disclosure platform. Sibanye-Stillwater is one of only 179 companies globally and the only company from South Africa to achieve an ‘A’ rating for climate change disclosure in the latest survey based on data submitted through CDP’s 2019 climate change questionnaire and is one of a small number of high-performing companies which have been recognised out of the thousands that were scored. CDP’s annual environmental disclosure and scoring process is widely recognised as the gold standard of corporate environmental transparency, supported by substantial investors globally who requested companies to disclose data on environmental impacts, risks and opportunities through CDP’s platform. Read: The role of gold in climate change Over 8,400 companies participated during the most recent CDP process. Sibanye-Stillwater will also be included in the “STOXX Global Climate Change Leaders Index” which is based on the CDP A List. Sibanye-Stillwater CEO, Neal Froneman comments: “We are pleased to be recognised for our commitment to, and disclosure on climate change. The recognition from CDP comes at a crucial time where the impacts of ESG are becoming more pronounced. "As the largest primary producer of Platinum Group Metals (PGMs), the metals of which are used in the production of catalytic converters in automobiles to remove noxious gasses from exhaust fumes, Sibanye-Stillwater is committed to expanding its role in providing a cleaner and sustainable environment and improving lives. "Consistent with our renewed strategic focus on ESG, we continue to look at how we can improve our performance, not only on the environmental front, but across various ESG disciplines.” Paul Simpson, CEO of CDP, says: “Congratulations to the companies that achieved a position on CDP’s A List this year, for leading in environmental performance and transparency. The scale of the business risks from the climate emergency, deforestation and water insecurity are vast – as are the opportunities from addressing them – and it’s clear the private sector has a vital role to play at this critical time. "The A List companies are leading the market in corporate sustainability, tackling environmental risks and setting themselves up to thrive in tomorrow’s economy.”