AIM-listed exploration company Oriole Resources this week announced that its Bibemi gold project in Cameroon is continuing to show promising potential. Cameroon – Oriole
Resources is developing the through its partnership with Bureau d'Etudes et d'Investigations
Géologico-minières and Géotechniques
et Géophysiques. Recent mapping over the main Bakassi area has confirmed
the continuation of mineralisation in Zone 1 by 1.3 km to over 5 km, with
rock-chip samples from stacked veins returning up to 35.86 per tonnes gold.
 
Further drill holes are being planned to test north-eastern Bakassi area. Read: Cameroon's gold potential Great start to the year Oriole Resources CEO, Tim Livesey, said: “The results of our initial mapping, trenching and sampling programmes in 2018/19 confirmed extensive gold anomalism but it was clear that gaining a better understanding of the structural setting would be essential in order for us to identify the most prospective areas of mineralisation where there is potential to define a resource.   “We are delighted to see such positive results at the beginning of the 2020 field season. The mapping has confirmed extension of the Zone 1 structure to the north-east and, importantly, the presence of sub-horizontal stacked veins is very encouraging for the development of a resource target.   “Rock-chip sampling along this structure has returned consistent gold mineralisation, with all 10 samples from “Category 1” veins showing gold mineralisation, the highest grade being 35.86 g/t Au.    “This again highlights the prospectivity of the Bakassi area, continuing to confirm our geological model and affording us the opportunity to go on to identify significant widths of gold mineralisation in the system.   “This has been a fantastic start to our field season in Cameroon. It’s rare to have your geological models advanced and supported so strongly, with every analysis coming back positive for gold. This is a great credit to our geological team who have developed and tested this hypothesis, yet again highlighting the value of having “boots on the ground."   “We look forward to following-up with further field work and a targeted diamond drill programme during 2020.” Oriole Resources’ work at Bibemi has initially focused on Bakassi, targeting two high-priority areas ‘Zone 1′ and ‘Zone 2’. The remaining areas of gold anomalism outside of this central zone are yet to be systematically explored by the company.