AP Ventures has announced that Impala Platinum (Implats) has become a Limited Partner and Advisory Board Member in AP Ventures Fund II. AP Ventures’ investment strategy is focused on companies developing technologies which are capable of sustainably solving global challenges such as renewable energy integration and resource scarcity. Read more about PGMs A key area of focus is the decarbonisation of transport, mining and heavy industry. AP Ventures is the only fund of its kind offering investors access to these innovative, fast-growing companies built on the unique properties of platinum group metals (PGMs). In welcoming Implats as its seventh Limited Partner, AP Ventures, its investors and its portfolio companies look forward to benefitting from working with a strong partner that is committed to developing more sustainable ways of working which will be of benefit to its own activities. AP Ventures has recently established a presence in South Africa and looks forward to working with Implats and other Limited Partners to provide commercialisation opportunities for its portfolio companies. Commenting on the investment by Implats, Andrew Hinkly, Managing Partner, AP Ventures says: “We are delighted to welcome Implats as a Limited Partner in Fund II. Implats is a strong partner which supports our strategy of market development for hydrogen technologies using PGMs. “We look forward to working with the team and combining our efforts to decarbonise mining activities and bring value to communities in South Africa.” Commenting on the announcement, Nico Muller, Chief Executive, Implats says: “We are pleased to be joining some of our peers as a limited partner in AP Ventures. Our multi-year investment in Fund II increases Implats’ focused market development spend on key evolving end-uses for PGMs including hydrogen, fuel cell mobility and energy storage. “AP Ventures’ core linkages and strong developmental commitment to South Africa will help harness the benefits of PGM demand growth for all our stakeholders.”