Tirupati Graphite, the fully integrated, revenue generative, specialist graphite and graphene producer with operations in Madagascar and India, has confirmed that its Prospectus has been approved by the Financial Conduct Authority and published by the Company. The Prospectus relates to the admission of the Company’s ordinary shares to the standard listing segment of the Official List of the FCA and to trading on the Main Market for listed securities of the London Stock Exchange, expected 11 December 2020. Read more about graphite The Company is also pleased to announce the launch on 1 December 2020 of an intermediaries offer of the Company’s ordinary shares as part of its initial public offering, providing retail investors with the opportunity to participate in the IPO on equal terms as institutional and professional investors. PrimaryBid Limited is acting as Intermediaries Offer Advisor. Shishir Poddar, CEO of Tirupati Graphite, says: “This marks another momentous step towards achieving our mission of being a global graphite and graphene leader, and listing on the London Stock Exchange. “We are delighted with the support our fund-raise has received so far, which is testament to the strength of our business and its unique position as a provider of sustainable products that support green applications. “Having secured £6 million with key institutional and professional investors, we are delighted to open the fundraising to retail investors via PrimaryBid. “This marks yet another milestone achievement in facilitating access to an IPO for individual UK investors, adding to the many firsts we are offering as a company. “With ever growing demand for graphite in light of rapid developments in the electric vehicle sector, advanced materials, flame retardants and thermal management markets, this is an opportune time to be welcoming new investors to our company and broadening our market reach. “With a strong growth strategy and significant value-uplift potential, our team is excited to further advance our operations for the benefit of all stakeholders in a sustainable manner that is reflective of our corporate values, further details of which are outlined below. We look forward to the exciting opportunities ahead.”