Glencore has announced that Ivan Glasenberg will retire as CEO and as a member of the Glencore Board during the first half of 2021. Gary Nagle will then become the Glencore CEO and join the Board. Nagle intends to relocate from Australia to Switzerland early next year and will work with Glasenberg to effect the transition. Commenting on the succession process, Tony Hayward, Chairman says: “The Board has worked with Ivan over the past two years to oversee a seamless transition to the next generation of leadership across Glencore’s business. “The fact that each department has promoted from within the Group is a credit to the work done to ensure there is strength in depth. Gary Nagle has held senior roles in coal and ferroalloys in Colombia, South Africa and Australia. “He has been on the Board’s radar for more than several years and was selected following a succession process overseen by the Board. We are confident that he has the right skill set and qualities to lead the Glencore of tomorrow.” Commenting on Glasenberg, Tony Hayward, Chairman says: “I have known Ivan for over 15 years, working closely with him as a Director for the last nine years. What he has achieved is unique. His vision created two of the world’s largest mining companies – Glencore and Xstrata. “With the support of his partners, Ivan understood the importance of creating a long-term asset base to underpin Glencore’s leading marketing franchise. “The IPO in 2011 provided the catalyst to re-unite Glencore with Xstrata, the mining business that Glencore had founded and financed. “Each step in the evolution of the business has been informed by the needs of the customer and reflected the changing dynamics of the global environment and commodity markets. Underpinning all this is Ivan’s simple mantra of value over volume. “His work ethic and dedication to the company and its employees has inspired a loyalty that is rare in business. “As Ivan hands over to Gary, he does so at a time of huge change. As the world moves to recover from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, while also addressing the challenge of climate change, our industry has a significant opportunity to contribute to the economic recovery by providing commodities essential to the transition to a low-carbon economy. “Glencore and its portfolio of future facing commodities is uniquely positioned to meet the needs of today and the demands of tomorrow. The benchmark by which any great CEO can be judged is whether he or she leaves the business in a better position than when they started. Not only has Ivan achieved this with Glencore, but his vision and drive have left a lasting impact on the industry as a whole.” Ivan Glasenberg says: “I am proud of the great company that we have built. Together, we have created one of the world’s largest diversified miners and marketers of commodities. “Today, our diversified portfolio uniquely positions us to play an essential role in the global transition to a low-carbon economy. I have worked with Gary since he joined the company twenty years ago. I have always regarded it as a critical part of my job to develop the next generation of leadership at Glencore and I am proud of the strong leadership team that we developed from which we were able to select Gary. “I am confident that his leadership, along with the support of themanagement team, will enable Glencore to take advantage of the opportunities that lie ahead and be a strong custodian for my shareholding in the company.” Gary Nagle says: “I am grateful for the trust placed in me by the Board and honoured to beappointed CEO at such an exciting time for Glencore. We will continue to deliver value to our shareholders, while operating safely and responsibly.”