Vetifly supports vital supply chain discussion Despite many challenges to the mining and event sectors this year the interest in Nigeria’s mining future has not abated. “In the course of 2020, as the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic became evident, both the mining and event sectors embraced technology and, as we like to call it, ‘pivoted to digital’ and the response from the mining community was very positive, supportive and innovative,” says Sabrina Tab, event manager of the annual Nigeria Mining Week conference and exhibition. She adds: “It shows that despite all the challenges and unexpected delays that we all experienced, there remains a real need to connect and to do business. Going digital also had many advantages as we were able to reach experts and connect prospective business partners who would not necessarily have travelled to our live event before.” Investor-friendly environment“In partnership with our media platform Mining Review Africa,” Tab explains, “we were able to explore many aspects of doing business in the Nigerian mining sector and hear from those that are already very successful there. And the Nigerian government continued on its path and message of creating an investor-friendly environment and the enthusiastic participation and support of the mining minister, Arch. Olamilekan Adegbite, was appreciated by all. “As we prepare for our last webinar of the year, which is focused on a particularly relevant topic for these times, namely addressing logistical constraints through innovative solutions, we look forward to continuing our engagement with our Nigeria Mining Week community, whether it be through continued digital programmes in the new year or when we return to Abuja in 2021 for our live event. We have all missed that energy on site and we look forward to connecting again in October!” Exploring supply chain solutionsThe webinar will explore the theme of mining supply chain amidst the development of Nigeria’s mining industry and the growth of the local solid mineral production sector. Sponsored by Vetifly, the expert panel will discuss what the short and medium term solutions are to tackle the current infrastructure deficit and security challenges faced by miners in Nigeria. WEBINAR: Mining Supply Chain: Addressing logistical constraints through innovative solutions Date: Thursday, 10 December 2020 Time: 10:00 GMT/ 11:00 WAT (60 min)Moderator: Laura Cornish, Head of Content, Mining Review AfricaSpeakers: To register to attend this live event, click here: https://www.nigeriaminingweek.com/register-live-webinar-mining-supply-chain-addressing-logistical-constraints-through-innovative Live, digital sessions still availableThe Nigeria Mining Week Digital Event during October 2020 offered five days of free, interactive content and engagement with some 2000 attendees. The Swapcard online platform is still live where all the sessions are still available to watch on demand, including roundtables and an exclusive interview series with key stakeholders from the mining industry. Attendees can also still connect and find their business match on the Swapcard platform.The event attracted some 30 sponsors and exhibitors, proving that Nigeria’s mining sector has become a key destination, not only for investment but for local and international industry suppliers of specialised services and technology. To access the digital content: https://www.nigeriaminingweek.com/digital-eventSuccessful transition to digitalDuring this year, the Nigerian mining sector came out in full support of the digital journey of Nigeria Mining Week. Emotan Global Ventures Limited are the returning diamond sponsors for both the digital and the live events, while AG Vision, Minelab, Nigachem Nigeria Ltd, PUNUKA, PW Nigeria (PWN), Rapidlink and Udo Udoma & Belo-Osagie (UUBO) are all gold sponsors. Nigeria Mining Week is organised by the Miners Association of Nigeria (MAN) in collaboration with PwC and Clarion Events Africa and is supported by the Ministry of Mines and Steel Development. This year marks the fifth edition of the event, which has garnered increasing interest over the years. Clarion Events Africa is a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Other well-known events by Clarion Events Africa include Africa Mining Forum, DRC Mining Week, Enlit Africa (formerly African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa), Utility CEO Forums, Future Energy East Africa and Future Energy Nigeria. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group. Nigeria Mining Week dates and location:Digital sessions online: In run-up to October 2021Live conference and exhibition: 11-13 October 2021Live location: International Convention Centre, Abuja, Nigeria Website: https://www.nigeriaminingweek.com/Twitter:  https://twitter.com/NigeriaMWFacebook:  https://www.facebook.com/Nigeriaminingweek/LinkedIN: https://www.linkedin.com/company/nigeria-mining-week/ Media contact:Senior communications manager: Annemarie RoodbolOffice: +27 21 700 3558Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com