AfriTin Mining has successfully completed Stage I of its Phase 1 production ramp-up of its pilot mining and processing facility, achieving 63.9 tonnes of tin concentrate (containing 41.6 tonnes of tin metal) during the month of November, a 32% improvement on the previous month. The production level achieved in November represents approximately 107% of the Stage I target in terms of tin concentrate tonnes produced and 116% of the Stage I target in terms of tin contained in concentrate. Related:AfriTin: resurrecting Uis in Namibia Anthony Viljoen, CEO of AfriTin Mining comments: “We are delighted to have achieved nameplate tin concentrate production of 63.9 tonnes, at our flagship asset, the Uis Tin Mine, ahead of year end. “This is a defining milestone that has been achieved for the Company. This success speaks volumes for the high quality nature of the asset and the calibre of our management team, whom I would like to sincerely congratulate given the macro challenges faced by the global pandemic. Read more about mining in Namibia “Furthermore, this accomplishment provides us with the platform to progress, with proven confidence, our development plan for the Uis Tin Mine towards a large-scale mining and processing facility.” Following the optimisation initiatives implemented over the course of 2020, the performance of the operation has exceeded nameplate production and reached this milestone prior to the end of 2020 as previously projected.The monthly production performance for 2020 is tabulated below. With the production ramp-up complete, the Company will, in future, switch to quarterly reporting of production performance. Tin concentrate production for the year to date totals 301 tonnes. Despite COVID-19 related restrictions, shipping of tin concentrate through the port of Walvis Bay to the off-take partner in Thailand continues unabated. AfriTin will now focus on maintaining steady state production, while exploring opportunities for further optimisation and expansion of the operation. These opportunities include a modular expansion of the plant throughput, and potential production of a by-product in the form of a tantalum concentrate. The Company is conducting test work to investigate the feasibility of magnetically separating tantalum minerals from the tin concentrate. The health, safety, and well-being of AfriTin’s employees, contractors and the local community are of utmost importance to the Company. As previously announced, strict COVID-19 mitigation measures remain implemented across the Company and all necessary steps have been taken to safeguard the workforce. The Company is pleased to report that there are still no confirmed cases of COVID-19 at the Uis Tin Mine.