Global Industrial IoT (IIoT) and cloud technology company sensemetrics has joined forces with Singapore-based wireless sensor connectivity devices provider Ackcio to automate data management and analytics for mutual customers automating geotechnical and structural instrumentation in underground and surface mining, and infrastructure markets. The alignment between the two companies accelerates digital transformation for businesses in these sectors with an integrated solution that bundles sensemetrics’ software-driven productivity tools and real-time data insights with Ackcio’s proven wireless monitoring offerings. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 11, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here The combined solution gives organisations a powerful way to not only automate the collection of distributed and condition monitoring data, but to also manage and analyse it using sensemetrics’ software, with the aim to mitigate risk, reduce environmental impact, and improve safety management programmes. Read more TECH NEWS “From tunnel collapses, to dam breaches, infrastructure damage and financial loss, far too many tragedies have occurred,” says Nimantha Baranasuriya, co-founder and CEO of Ackcio. “We share a common mission with sensemetrics around preventing these incidents, and we welcome the opportunity to combine our technological strengths to bring automated monitoring to our mutual customers to meaningfully mitigate risk for our clients,” Baranasuriya adds. With this alliance, sensemetrics is building on its strategy to expand further into underground environments. One of the biggest advantages the combined Ackcio-sensemetrics solution addresses is the need for greater flexibility in distributed condition monitoring, allowing for increased customisation when it comes to addressing the best way to reduce risk in each unique environment, says sensemetrics CEO Cory Baldwin. “Ackcio’s long range mesh technology is widely recognised as superior for tunneling and underground industrial environments,” says Baldwin, noting that that there is no other solution that is as effective. Tailings dams risk mitigation Offering access to real-time information and analytics for continuous and complete monitoring for geotechnical, environmental and mining applications, sensemetrics recently introduced a tailored IIoT solution that gives mining companies and their insurers real-time, end-to-end Tailings Storage Facilities (TSF) insights. The IIoT solution gives mining companies access to real-time information and analytics for continuous and complete surveillance across construction, operation, and closure phases of the TSF. The sensemetrics platform addresses all of the best practices outlined in the Tailings Governance Framework, published by the International Council on Mining & Metals (ICMM), which aims to minimize the risk of catastrophic TSF failures. sensemetrics supports reinsurance companies, as well as primary insurers, to gather relevant TSF data critical to the risk underwriting process and effectively mitigate risks across the TSF’s entire lifecycle. sensemetrics platform unpacked New features now available in the sensemetrics platform include native iOS and Android mobile apps for simplified remote sensor management; a Revision Management System (RMS) that supports chronology of events over the lifespan of a sensor, along with journaling and property management to unlock seamless data normalisation of calculated metrics. It also includes a remote sensing module with a dashboard display – powered by spatially dense datasets from ground and satellite-based systems. The sensing module provides unparalleled tools for visualisation and corroboration of metrics gathered from in-place sensors to accurately characterise asset performance. A plug-and-play solution, the sensemetrics platform relies on state-of-the-art visualisation tools and offers manufacturer-agnostic edge connectivity, a true cloud design, an event-driven and scalable microservices architecture, workflow enhancing apps, and an open API interface. Featuring end-to-end sensor integration and asset management, the platform simplifies the complexities traditionally associated with sensor automation and management while also reducing costs and improving operational efficiency.