A provider of Onboarding, training and contractor management solutions throughout Southern Africa, KBC Health & Safety has a long-standing relationship with mining company Exxaro. It is currently providing its services at the GG6 Expansion Project at Grootegeluk Coal Mine in Limpopo. Coordinating and managing the GG6 Expansion mega project Onboarding process, which includes everything from medical examinations to safety inductions, as well as overseeing the core project team, is Contractor Co-Ordinator Lord Steven Rogers. Read more TECH NEWS The project appointed KBC Health & Safety’s services at the Exxaro Grootegeluk Complex Marapong Training Centre in terms of classroom-based inductions. KBC also aids with permits for specialised services such as working at heights and lockout procedures, as well as site-specific inductions for all relevant contractors. Read more about coal In addition, KBC Health & Safety has a permanent representative on-site at the mine to assist, for example, with competency certification for truck and crane operators. Comprehensive and timeous weekly and monthly reports are provided to allow Exxaro to keep track of all the training to ensure that ‘NO HARM’ is maintained on the project. “The KBC people at Marapong are unfailingly polite and courteous, from their interaction to the mine personnel at the training centre to the contractors themselves,” notes Lord Rogers. “With the expert assistance of KBC, we have achieved our deliverables. Their commitment to service delivery and high standards assisted the project in mitigating any possible risks.” Lord Rogers highlights: “At the beginning we were a bit apprehensive as to exactly how KBC would interface with such a complex project, but with the quality of the service being provided and how effortlessly we worked as a team, we will recommend their service to other mega projects.” Exxaro is a flagship client for KBC, notes Regional General Manager Dries Loubser. “The close relationship we have forged with GG6 Expansion project and the relationship with the Project Contractor Onboarding team is testament to our excellent staff and points to the significant value we can add to such an important project.” KBC’s business model adds direct value to corporate clients, contracting companies, individuals and communities by streamlining Onboarding and improving legislative compliance by partnering with its clients to guarantee time-saving and cost-reduction. “Our clients receive world-class training, with learning methodologies aimed at increasing knowledge retention and systems designed to put the power of compliance back into the control of our clients and their contractors. “Our vision is to create a ‘NO HARM’ culture for generations to come,” concludes KBC Health & Safety Marketing Specialist Lara Clarke.