Clarion Events Africa’s Media division is thriving “Clarion Events Africa’s trade publications are not only surviving, but thriving, because we have managed to reinvent the medium by embracing digital and key event partnerships to have a 360⁰ live visibility and accessibility.” This is according to Ross Hastie, Group Director Media at Clarion Events Africa, for many years trading as Spintelligent. The company is also known for its multi-award winning B2B conferences and exhibitions across the continent. “While many media
houses are struggling to keep traditional publishing business models viable, we
differentiate ourselves by being part of the industry, not outsiders looking
in. It’s content by the industry, for the industries we serve - energy, power
and mining. “As publishers, we
have the unique opportunity to distribute content to the audiences attending
our events – to have an entire industry community under one roof is a
marketer’s dream. “Conversations don’t
stop at the end of an event. We’re able to continue the engagement for the
other 362 days of the year. This way we offer a seamlessly connected and holistic
solution to clients by offering webinars, videos, interviews and social media
campaigns along with the flagship print publications. A major part of our value proposition is to give our clients and partners access to Clarion’s truly global network of expertise. Regional event content teams around the world work with our media brands  namely ESI Africa, Smart Energy International, Mining Review Africa and Power Engineering International as well as annual journals such as Global Energy Elites and Mining Elites. This enables
us, while retaining local expertise, to harness the influence and competence of
Clarion’s worldwide reach.” 

Engagement statistics for Mining
Review Africa, ESI Africa and Smart Energy International: Clarion Events Africa Clarion Events Africa, formerly trading as Spintelligent, is a multi-award-winning Cape Town-based exhibition and conference producer across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Well-known events include African Utility Week, POWERGEN Africa, Future Energy East Africa, Nigeria Mining Week, Africa Mining Forum and DRC Mining Week. Clarion Events Africa is also part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group’s Clarion Energy Series, which runs over 40 events that cover the oil, gas, power and energy sectors, making it one of the group’s largest portfolios. Clarion Events Ltd is one of the world’s leading event organisers; headquartered in the UK, with offices in continental Europe, Latin America, Middle East, Africa, APAC and North America. At the recent Association of Event Organisers (AEO) Excellence Awards, Clarion Events was recognised as the most influential company over the past 25 years. Websites: https://www.esi-africa.com/ https://www.miningreview.com/ https://www.smart-energy.com/ https://www.powerengineeringint.com/ Media contact: Senior communications manager: Annemarie Roodbol Telephone:  +27 21 700 3558