Optimisation of business operations in the bulk material transportation industry is being revolutionised by innovative volumetric scanning technology. Accurately weighing items in motion is highly specialised and achieved by only a handful of companies globally. Trysome Auto Electrical Engineering has recently collaborated with one such company, Walz Scale USA, to bring innovative, digital solutions to the local mining and transportation industries with a big focus on real-time information monitoring. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 1, 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Every business entity that
relies on weighing, strives to increase production efficiency, reduce
maintenance costs and maximise on safety whilst maintaining accuracy to
increase profit. Having more accurate weight data means you can keep closer track of your payloads, obtain precise measurements of incoming and outgoing materials, and maximise the load capacity of haul trucks without overloading. Read more TECH NEWS Where accurate volume
and tonnage is imperative, direct, non-contact, in-motion, volume measurement
is the most accurate payload measurement available. The Walz scanner
system has been designed to interface directly with mine site data
infrastructure systems. This allows for the data to be delivered to key mine
site personnel, in real-time, for monitoring and analysis. Passing beneath a
laser, each haul truck bucket is scanned and referenced by advanced algorithms
and sophisticated software resulting in an accurate volume estimation,
generated by 2D load images. Using this method, load volumes can be calculated
to within a proven and tested +/-1%. Volumetric load
scanning technology aids in the accurate monitoring of: This technology is
poised to revolutionise the bulk material transportation industry. Flexible weighing
where you haul! In addition to its volumetric
load scanner system, Walz Scale facilitates weighing where you haul with its
range of portable axle scales designed and constructed to be the industry's
most dependable, most accurate, and longest lasting heavy-duty axle scale
system on the market today. The portable axle scales will outperform and outlast most any other axle scale on the market. These scales are built to work in your tough environments and a wide range of configurations is offered to accommodate your specific implementation needs. There is a range of different weight capacities, power options, display and print options, pad configurations, optional removable ramps, USB interface options, terminals, transport options, and of course a range of prices to fit your budget. The mining series of
portable mining truck scales are used for earth foundations allowing mine sites
to transport their scales directly to their haulage asset. Truck scales are often integral components of a business. Whether your operation weighs just a few trucks per day or hundreds, accurate and reliable truck scale systems are integral to ensuring business efficiency and profitability.