In line with industry’s move towards Industry 4.0, AEL Intelligent Blasting is moving full steam ahead with a digital transformation strategy. The strategy aimed at enabling mines to leverage electronic blasting products and practices to achieve lower cost production cycles and improved safety. This article first appeared in Mining Elites in Africa 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here As part of its global expansion strategy, AEL has repositioned its overall product and service offering to stay relevant in an industry that is undergoing many changes to meet the demands of today’s mining industry. AEL has had to adapt its offering to better align with the mining industry’s pursuit to gain further improvements in safety, mining efficiencies and productivity, while reducing costs. The
blasting leader is embracing digital transformation through a variety of
projects and offerings. Adopting
digital twin technology Central to this strategy is the adoption of a digital twin in both its manufacturing and blasting applications. A digital twin, which is a digital replica of a physical entity, enhances proactive decision making, as well as the ability to select and optimise inputs and model various outcomes until the ideal result is identified. Watch: AEL Intelligent Blasting takes the global world by storm “With
this approach, we can more accurately predict imminent equipment failures and
perform planned maintenance before it becomes critical. This prevents possible
costly shutdowns and enables us to manage our costs more efficiently, resulting
in tangible benefits for our customers,” says Edwin Ludick, MD of AEL. From
a blasting application perspective, the digital twin ensures that the most
suitable products, design and methodology are chosen to guarantee the most
appropriate blasting result. Software
remains centre stage Meanwhile, AEL’s introduction of advanced
blast and fragmentation modelling software, which predicts and automates the
analysis of data pertaining to improved blast outcomes, has changed the way
blasting patterns and parameters are planned. Simon Tose, Global Manager – Mining
Optimisation at AEL, says that this has allowed for much better comparison of
blast designs based on the geology, rock properties and the actual explosive and
initiating systems selected, which leads to improved stripping rates, less
waste/overburden and better recovery of minerals. “The suite of software systems allow for cause
and effect studies to be undertaken to better understand the impact of changes
in the mining conditions for both optimal and consistent blast results. “In addition, the information provided acts as
a staging area for improved blast design and follow-up capability on the
execution of the planned contribution from AEL as an explosive supplier,”
explains Tose. Industry 4.0 has brought with it the ability to interpret the multitudes of useful data available as well as the ability to transfer information from the bench to these blasting software programmes in real-time. This allows for improves decision making and allows for more rapid decision making which in turn supports proactive management decisions and problem solving – moving the industry away from the reactive decision making approach of the past. Virtual
reality brings blasting to life Meanwhile, the introduction of virtual and
augmented reality (VR) technology is allowing these parameters to be visualised
in a digital world through the use of headsets. VR based training will be a key focus for AEL
in future, as the company will be able to train junior mining engineers using VR
training simulations of both open cast and underground mining environments. To this effect, AEL entered into a partnership with the University of Pretoria in 2017. The partnership focuses on the development of the Department of Mining Engineering’s VR training material through the instructional design and inclusion of VR and augmented reality components, including consequence training – prototypes of training material chapters and VR examples. Additionally, the company aims to implement VR
training for Mobile Manufacturing Unit drivers as part of its safety and efficiency
drive. AEL further assists in the software development of blasting practices to
gain VR-augmented experience, which the company is certain will yield
incremental improvement on existing blasting practices to enhance AEL’s
technology leadership. Digital
technology drives product development AEL’s is under way with the development of a
new generation of electronic detonators, which are fitted with GPS positioning.
These will allow for better understanding of each blast hole and the subsequent
impact of each hole on the overall blast design. Moreover,
better understanding of the mass of explosives and improvements in blast design,
such as stemming of blasthole collars (which redirect blasting energy to the
rock more efficiently), allows for further development of the software tools used
to control the adverse effects of blasting such as blast vibrations, potential
airblast and flyrock, says Tose. As technological developments continue at pace
in the blasting industry, Tose believes that future major developments in the
industry will leverage modern data analysis and utilise artificial intelligence
to further improve blasting. Global
expansion strategy Apart from driving these technological
advancements, AEL seeks to expand its business, not only in Africa, but across
the world. The company aims to further increase its global
business footprint from the current 60% to 80% with the establishment of 15 new
facilities worldwide. “Our goal is to pursue the entry into at least five new
markets by 2022,” says Ludick. While
AEL’s plans to expand its global footprint by an additional 20%, this does not
mean that the company is moving away from its South African operations. “We
are fully compliant with the new South African Mining Charter, which is
testimony to our long term commitment to the South African mining industry,”
concludes Ludick.