Mining moving to Industry 4.0 and adopting automation is a double-edged sword. Yes, it will reduce costs and improve productivity, but these innovations also increase the risk of a cyber-attack. Take, for example, self-driving trucks. If a cyber-criminal takes control these vehicles, they could cause severe damage as well as endanger lives. And that’s where French multinational company GECI plays a key role in preventing such attacks. This article first appeared in Mining Elites in Africa 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here With its
platform of solutions and services in cybersecurity, it integrates the best
innovations of the market for the benefit of its mining clients throughout the
world. It’s still early days for the companies in Africa but under the leadership of regional director for Middle East and Africa, Mike Bergen, the company has a range of software that can neutralise and combat cyber threats such as phishing, malware and ransomware. Read more TECH NEWS Working with working with experts from the Israeli Defence Forces, GECI has developed solutions such as CyberX. CyberX offers monitoring and vulnerability management to rapidly spot threats and stop them before they cause safety or environmental incidents, costly downtime or the loss of valuable intellectual property. In addition, the technology is seamless, non-invasive, and simple to implement straight out of the box, delivering insights in less than an hour. Another
solution is BitDam which protects enterprise communications such as emails and
chats from advanced content-borne threats, preventing known and unknown cyber-attacks. As mining companies embrace the Digital Age and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), they expose themselves to a dearth of cleverly crafted cyber-attacks. Backed by a track record of successful results in various industries around the world, GECI is set to play a key role in ensuring that the mines of the future in Africa are equipped to effectively and efficiently ward off cyber-attacks. Comments from the judges “Defence against cyber-attacks becoming increasingly important with automated mining, so GECI tech excels in vulnerability management to rapidly spot threats and stop them before they cause safety or environmental incidents, costly downtime or the loss of valuable IP,” Tom Quinn