Cash-strapped junior miners take note: Obsideo Consulting offers an alternative option to traditional EPC/EPCM models which has proven to get projects off the ground quickly and cost effectively. Obsideo Consulting has adopted a client-orientated engineering model that eliminates the challenges and costs associated with paying for man hours worked as these generally increase in the attempt to ‘de-risk’ the unforeseen challenges that arise during the project implementation phase. This article first appeared in Mining Elites in Africa 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here While the EPC/EPCM model may previously have been considered viable for Tier 1 mining companies, it is an extremely inefficient model for junior companies operating with very tight budgets and limited financial capabilities. Read more about infrastructure Having implemented this client-centric approach across a number of
projects, Obsideo Consulting is well positioned to help cash-strapped miners
get their first project off the ground. Understanding the need to be digitally relevant A digitally savvy focus has seen Obsideo Consulting recognised as an Industry 4.0 frontrunner. This results in innovative engineering solutions which have delivered significant success for its impressive list of projects, which includes high profile clients within the junior and mid-tier space in South Africa and abroad. Innovations drive momentum for 2020 and beyond Obsideo Consulting offers, among other options, modular plants. While this is a familiar concept in the industry, only a handful have successfully implemented it. As this approach is one every junior miner is considering, the company’s scope for offering end users simple yet efficient processing solutions is immense. The
company remains committed to growing its footprint in 2020 and has clearly
established the correct foundations and track record to prove it. The
Obsideo modular plant designs enable the company to dispatch trial-assembled
plants to remote destinations, thereby ensuring minimal erection and commissioning
time in order for the clients to start generating revenue as soon as possible. Processing efficiency the order of the day Based on ever fluctuating commodity prices, mining companies need to continually focus on efficiency improvements within the mine itself as well as the processing plant to ensure minimal cost per ton operations. It is for this reason that Obsideo Consulting has developed a set of plant design criteria that focuses on processing efficiency and the use of bespoke processing technology such as LARCODEMS to achieve optimal results. Our specialities include: The detail design, construction
and commissioning of processing plants, inclusive of the following commodities: