In July 2017, the government of Tanzania passed a number of sweeping changes to the Mining Act of 2010 – the legal and regulatory framework that regulates the country’s natural resources. Supporting regulations were also enacted in 2018 and later amended in 2019. The changes enacted to regulations by the government of President John Magufuli have made the operating environment for mining companies more restrictive, denting investor sentiment in the country, CHANTELLE KOTZE writes. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 2, 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here The bad The three new
laws that were enacted in 2017, which significantly increased government
control over the mining sector in Tanzania, include: These new laws provide the national assembly with sweeping powers to review and instruct renegotiation of previous arrangements or agreements concluded by the government. Read: Claim to arbitration against Government of Tanzania continues They also stipulate new requirements for state participation in all mining companies, including at least a 16% free-carried interest, which may be increased up to 50% to match the value of historical tax benefits granted to mining companies. It also increases royalty rates – for gemstones and diamonds from 5% to 6%, for metallic minerals such as copper, gold, silver and platinum group minerals from 4% to 6%. Moreover, the new
laws have stripped foreign companies of the right to seek international
arbitration in the event of a domestic legal dispute. Furthermore,
these regulatory changes (as well as further ones enacted in 2018 and then
amended in 2019) have led to significant policy uncertainty in the country,
which will hamper new investments and disrupt existing ones. The ugly According to Diego Oliva-Velez, commodities analyst at Fitch Solutions, the most evident example of regulatory uncertainty is the dispute that came to the fore in January 2020 between three mining companies and the government of Tanzania over repossessed retention licenses issued prior to 2018. On 10 January 2018, the government published the Mining (Mineral Rights) Regulations, 2018 which under Regulation 21 cancelled all retention licenses issued prior to that date, which would cease to have any legal effect. Read: Amani Gold secures gold dealer licence in Tanzania As such, the
retention licenses granted to TSXV-listed battery metals exploration and
development company Montero Mining (Wigu Hill rare earth element project), ASX-listed
resources company Indiana Resources (Ntaka Hill nickel sulphide project) and TSXV-listed
junior gold explorer Winshear Gold Corp. (SMP gold project) prior to 2018 have
now been revoked by the Tanzanian government. In response, these companies have
initiated international arbitration procedures, Oliva-Velez notes. In the short-term, the Tanzanian general election is expected to increase the country’s policy uncertainty over the coming months, likely stalling new investment decisions until after the vote takes place in October 2020. Read: Tanzanian Government and Barrick bury the hatchet Fitch Solutions’ Sub-Saharan Africa Country Risk team foresees risks of social unrest in the run up to the elections, especially if any further shift towards authoritarian behaviour takes place on behalf of the government, with opposition activists likely to draw more attention to the issue at such a time. In the long-term, Oliva-Velez notes that the Tanzanian mining sector has significant potential as the country contains significant high-grade gold deposits that are yet to be exploited. Read more about gold mining Furthermore, a sustained recovery in global gold prices over the next few years should provide companies with an incentive to expand their operations or to launch new mining projects in the country. Nevertheless, in order for this potential to be unlocked, Oliva-Velez advises that the country’s investment environment be significantly improved. The good The most recent amendments to Tanzania’s mining sector include four key regulatory changes enacted in February 2019, all relating to the country’s Local Content Regulations. The Local Content Regulations follow the amendments of the Mining Act, 2010 through the Written Laws (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act, 2017, which introduced the local content requirements. Local content
regulations now require that at least 20% of a mining company operating in
Tanzania must be owned by Tanzanian citizens, down from 51% previously (as
stipulated by the Mining Local Content Regulations introduced in 2018). Other requirements for
an entity to qualify as an indigenous Tanzanian company remain the same (the
company must be incorporated in Tanzania, Tanzanian citizens must hold at least
80% of the company’s executive and senior management positions and 100% of its
non-managerial and other positions). With regards to the
provision of financial services, a contractor, subcontractor, licensee or other
allied entity is still required to retain only the services of a Tanzanian
financial institution or organisation. Further alterations to the Local Content Regulations have reduced the stringent financial services requirements for mining companies operating in the country. Read more about mining in East Africa While the original Local Content Regulations stipulated that mining companies or other companies involved in the sector could only open a bank account with an “indigenous” Tanzanian bank, in other words, with a bank that was majority owned by Tanzanians. Under the amended regulations the word “indigenous” has been removed and stakeholders can now maintain bank accounts with Tanzanian banks that have a minimum of 20% Tanzanian shareholding. Moreover, stakeholders
in the Tanzanian mining industry must submit local content plans to the Mining
Commission, which decides or approves the plans as per the recommendations of
the Local Content Committee. The amended
regulations have extended the timeframes (to 60 days, compared with 25
previously) by which the Mining Commission and Local Content Committee
acknowledge receipt of, review and communicate decisions on local content
plans. In summary On the whole, the
changes enacted over 2019 have been positive as they have made the country’s
local content requirements less stringent, thus making it easier for foreign
mining investors to operate in the country. Despite the recent positive alterations to local content requirements, changes enacted to regulations in recent years have made the operating environment in the mining industry more restrictive with investor confidence in the country’s mining sector expected to remain bleak for the time being.