TSXV-listed junior Namibia Critical Metals has announced details of the Term 1 planned work programme for its Lofdal heavy rare earths project in northern Namibia. As was recently announced,
the company has entered into an agreement with Japan Oil, Gas and Metals
National Corporation (JOGMEC) to jointly explore and develop Lofdal. Following the first meeting
of the management committee formed by Namibia Critical Metals and JOGMEC, the
objectives of the initial Term 1 work programme have been agreed to as follows: The C$3 million Term 1 work
programme will be undertaken from February 2020 to March 2021 and will be sole
funded pursuant to a firm non-refundable commitment by JOGMEC. Following completion of the Term 1 programme, JOGMEC has the right to earn a 40% interest in the project by funding an additional C$7 million in exploration expenditures and may earn an additional 10% interest by funding an additional C$10 million in exploration expenditures. Read more about what Namibia Critical Metals Lofdal is located 450 km
north-west of the capital city of Windhoek in the Kunene region of
north-western Namibia. The project area covers 314 km² centered on the Lofdal carbonatite complex which
hosts a number of rare earth occurrences, including the Area 4 deposit. Mineralisation at Area 4 is
dominated by xenotime, which is highly enriched in heavy rare earths. Value
drivers at Lofdal are dysprosium and terbium as opposed to praseodymium and
neodymium which are the value drivers in light rare earth deposits. Current mineral resources for
the Area 4 deposit are estimated to be 2.88 Mt of indicated mineral resources
at a grade of 0.32% TREO, yielding 9 230 t of REO, of which 7 050 t are
estimated to be heavy rare earth oxides (HREO) and 3.28 Mt of inferred mineral
resources at a grade of 0.27% TREO yielding 8 970 t of REO, of which 6 700 t
are estimated to be HREO. The current mineral resource
has been drilled to depths of between 125 - 225 vertical meters. Planned drilling will test
for extensions of the mineralisation along strike and to vertical depths of 250
- 300 m. The management committee has set an objective to double the size of the mineral resource through the provision of 7 700 m of diamond drilling at Area 4. Read about all the latest mining developments in Namibia The Area 4 deposit is one of
several rare earth occurrences know within the Lofdal carbonatite complex and Namibia
Critical Metals has evaluated a number of these occurrences with detailed mapping,
geophysics and drilling. There are two priority heavy rare earth targets that have not been drill tested and a total of 1 500 m of diamond drilling has been allocated in Term 1 to investigate xenotime mineralisation at the Northern Splay and at Dolomite Hill.