Hypervine,
the Glasgow-based start-up, has announced the start of a project, co-funded by
the European Space Agency (ESA), to develop services which utilise space-based
data to help extractive industries. Hypervine
improves these services through its blockchain ledger, allowing for all
satellite-sourced information to be guaranteed of the highest level of
accuracy, enabling quarry companies to increase profits and have unparalleled
oversight of their operations through the adoption of space assets, such as
readings for topography, liquid, mineral and density readings. Mining companies must constantly adapt to ever-changing economic, environmental and governmental policies making easily accessible, high quality and up-to-date data vital. Read more TECH NEWS Obtaining the right information with the highest degree of accountability often takes months. Numerous surveys must be cross-checked and compared on paper alongside satellite-sourced data, by multiple teams in different locations. Through
the implementation of Hypervine’s technology, data for mining teams and their
subsidiaries is clearly recorded on an unalterable ledger, removing the risk of
small changes being magnified down a chain, resulting in potentially
catastrophic yet avoidable dangers and miscalculations. Hypervine’s
CEO and Founder, Paul Duddy stated that “Working with the European Space Agency
is an incredible honour at such an early stage in our development. "I started out having seen the potential to help a host of different industries bring their process into a digital age, but also to help eradicate the all too often catastrophic and sometimes fatal accidents that occur due to miss-recorded data or lost paperwork. Watch: What role does blockchain have in ethical mining "Now, I am working with some of the sharpest minds there are, helping people on the ground in high-risk work environments to not only be safer, but be more sustainable in the process.” As
well as increasing accuracy when surveying and planning works on a new site,
reducing costs, margins for error and potential risks for teams on the ground,
implementation of Hypervine’s systems also allows for wider environmental
savings through operational efficiencies and carbon reduction. Beatrice
Barresi, Technical Officer in ESA Space Solutions added, “The use of
satellite-based data for mining work is already a sector experiencing huge
investment and funding across private and nationalised space programs. "ESA is very active in the development and deployment of innovative space-enabled applications that can quickly and effectively support better commercial outcomes. It is
a core goal of ours to make industries such as quarrying safer, cleaner and
more accountable. Working with companies such as Hypervine allows us to achieve
these goals whilst improving the standards across multiple industries. It has
been great working with Hypervine on this project and, we look forward to the
next phases to come.” There
are currently a number of projects in planning to develop digital tools using
satellite applications, including a proposed follow-on mining project to
further increase the use of cutting-edge digital processes in the mining
sector. Hypervine’s technology has been developed by its Founder and CEO Paul Duddy, a product development expert with experience increasing efficiencies and reducing costs through digitisation and implementation of new technologies for a variety of industries. Read: How blockchain is shaping ethics and morals in mining Whilst
already working with firms in Germany, the UK and the US including Galliford
Try Plc., Hypervine was recently announced as part of the latest cohort to join
the Scottish Centre of Excellence in Satellite Applications (SoXSA) / Tontine
incubator in Glasgow. This will provide industry-leading support in further developing Hypervine’s satellite supporting technologies and includes the start-up on the iGAP accelerator program.