With the failing of the country’s state-owned enterprises, a tough economy and slowdown in the mining and construction industries, owners and investors in the surface mining industry should take heart that the industry still holds many opportunities for those who remain committed. So says surface mining industry association, ASPASA, director, Nico Pienaar, who believes that the difference between success and failure in the surface mining industry mostly relates to the attitude of the owners and employees of the company rather than the state of the economy, diminishing commodity prices or rising costs. With members across the country, he says that as many companies are thriving as those that are failing. While they face the same odds as their peers, those who are thriving are most often the ones who have a positive outlook, participate in the association’s training and other initiatives, and those who constantly strive for ways of doing thing differently in a changing economy. Toughness required “There are undeniable factors that can influence the success of a business, but a positive approach and never-say-die attitude can still go a long way towards steering a company in the right direction. "And, we have noticed that while some companies had been scared-off by negative reports, many of our members choose to take the lead from their own experiences and situations, rather than hinging their expectations on media reports or public sentiments. “Based on these experiences I have compiled an informal list of traits that I have noticed sets many of the top performing mines apart from the struggling ones. This is the Top 10 list of actions that can be taken to make 2020 a great year: Pienaar concludes: “Those who believe that the downturn is across-the-board and don’t look for business will not do very well and may even fail in future, however those who look for solutions and new markets are set to thrive. "If you have given up or are overwhelmed by the bad news of the economy, then your opposition may already be lining up to buy your business on auction one day. Rather stay positive, keep doing the right things right and be part of the success story.”