Eastern Platinum, or Eastplats, has successfully produced platinum-group metals concentrate from its refurbished small-scale PGM scavenger circuit, also known as Circuit D. Eastplats is using the feed, following the recovery of chrome concentrate, directly from the retreatment project located at the company’s Crocodile River mine in South Africa. The PGM scavenger circuit is able to process 40 000 tpm of feed and the construction cost was less than US$150 000, as the company used the existing infrastructure at Crocodile River mine – which was maintained while the plant was on care and maintenance. “The
successful start of the PGM scavenger plant is the first step in the company’s
full-scale assessment of the PGM recoverability of the tailings resource and
provides further revenue opportunities for Eastplats,” says Eastplats President
and CEO Diana Hu. “The
company will continue to move forward with its assessment of the larger PGM
recoverability opportunities in relation to the tailings resource,” she says. Retreatment
project update Since entering into an agreement with Union Goal on 1 March 2018, Eastplats produced 598 034 t of chrome concentrate from the retreatment project, with an average grade of Cr2O3 at 38.6% during 2019. READ MORE: Eastplats enters into agreement to reignite Barplats production The
retreatment project stems from the agreement with Union Goal relating to the
construction, re-mining and processing of the tailing resource and offtake of chrome
concentrate from Barplats Mines tailings facility located at Crocodile River mine The
214 828 t production figure achieved in Q4 2019 was the company’s best
production quarter to date. During
January 2020, Eastplats produced an additional 101 606 t of chrome concentrate
from the retreatment project, which is the company’s largest monthly production
to date. With the goal to further optimize and
increase the chrome recovery of the retreatment project, Eastplats has
determined that it will invest approximately $6 million in additional
equipment, including installation, to enhance chrome concentrate recovery. The financing of these costs has been
agreed to in principal with Union Goal on similar loan terms to those contained
in the initial agreement. Eastplats said that it will provide an update as soon as such amendments to the framework agreement and the related agreements are entered into.