Zambia
is fortunate to be blessed by nature in several ways and has rich mineral and
gemstone reserves, which, if harnessed and developed properly, can go a long
way in enhancing the economic wealth of the country. The
government of Zambia is committed to making strides towards paving the way for
economic progress of the people of Zambia. The
expected boom in the gemstone sector following the government’s move to suspend
the 15% export duty will help promote Zambia as an attractive destination for
foreign gemstone investors from all over the world. AUTHOR: Boniface Mutale, director on the Board of Kagem Mining representing government Importantly,
small scale miners, who would have been wiped out had the export duty remained,
now stand a good chance to survive and flourish, leading to the overall
prosperity of the country. Kagem Mining takes pride in supporting the Government’s goal of uplifting the country’s people and welcomes the recent suspension of the 15% export duty. Read more about diamonds and gemstones Last
month Kagem Mining set a new benchmark in negotiations between the mining
sector and unions, agreeing a 10% increase in basic salaries for unionised
workers for 2020, with a further 10% for 2021. The collective agreement followed successful negotiations between management and representatives of the National Union of Miners & Allied Workers (NUMAW) and the Mine Workers Union of Zambia (MUZ), in which it was also agreed to enhance the company pension contribution from 15% to 20% of basic pay, bringing the effective salary increase to 15% for 2020 and 2021, and the overall increase to 22.5% over the next two years. Read more about mining in central Africa The
parties further agreed to enhance repatriation allowance by 11% and raise the
education allowance by 125%, recognising the importance of education of
employees’ children. Transport allowance has also been increased. The
agreement was hailed as a win-win situation by unions and management. Tellingly,
it came just a month after the Government agreed to suspend a 15% export tax on
gemstones imposed in the 2019 Budget. During
discussions on tax, companies often argue that taxes hamper investor confidence
and make them less inclined to invest in production for the long term. It
follows that if taxes are reduced, they should be more inclined to invest. Last
month’s successful wage negotiations are a demonstration of exactly that
principle in practice, with Kagem putting its money where its mouth is. That's
not to say that there was a direct quid pro quo, but it is an illustration that
when the private sector feels it is being listened to, and its business is
backed by an enabling environment, then the knock-on effect does indeed take
root. The
suspension of export tax directly affected Kagem's bottom line, freeing up cash
for reinvestment that will boost production, grow the industry and continue to
put Zambia's emerald sector at the top of the international market. Kagem is 25% owned by the Zambian Government through the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC), so the people of Zambia also stand to benefit from the potential for increased dividends. The
Government's action in rescinding the tax was the catalyst that stimulated the
sector, providing a much-needed shot in the arm that has created a virtuous
circle of benefit. The
move also paves the way for Kagem - of which Government is a shareholder - to
expand its footprint in the emerald industry by bringing additional emerald
mining licences under Kagem’s operation, increasing still further the country’s
gemstone production and generating additional dividends, royalties and
corporate tax. The
expansion of Kagem’s licence portfolio allows Government to become a direct shareholder
in the wider emerald sector, rather than only a single licence. Since
acquiring 75% of Kagem in 2008, Gemfields has been meticulous in transparently
declaring revenue, which has reached approximately US$635 million over 12 years
from the sale of emeralds at auctions both locally and internationally, and
which are monitored by representatives from the Ministry of Mines and Zambia
Revenue Authority (ZRA). Proceeds
from the auctions are repatriated in full to Zambia, generating valuable foreign
exchange for the nation. While
the majority of revenue is spent on mining costs and salaries, Kagem has
contributed approximately US$120 million to the Zambian Government in
cumulative corporation taxes, mineral royalties and dividends since 2008. This means
that, up to and including the financial year ending 30 June 2019, around 19
percent of Kagem’s revenues have flowed to the Zambian government in the last
decade. Over the same period, Kagem has declared US$50 million of dividends, with US$37.5 million thereof paid to Gemfields in its capacity as the 75% shareholder in Kagem. Read: Gemfields lists on the London Stock Exchange In
order to promote greater transparency surrounding our natural resources, more
mining companies in Zambia should be encouraged to publish the percentage of
their revenues that are paid to Government as taxes. This
would help Zambians better understand how much of the value realised from their
natural resources ends up in Government coffers. In
addition to the direct taxes paid to Government, increased investment in wages
and production will boost the revenue, profit, and the final amount of tax
collected by the Government, not only directly from Kagem but also from the
other businesses that benefit from the miners' increased wages: local shops,
extended families, farms, consumer goods manufacturers and the like. Economists
estimate that the economic value of salary payments is around six times the
actual amount paid when multiplier effects are considered. In
other words, for every kwacha paid to an employee, the wider economy of Zambia
benefits by K6. Kagem
provides more than 1,150 direct jobs, so their salaries, and the recent
increment, are a direct economic benefit to the nation. That is truly something worth celebrating.