Marrakech Mining Convention (MMC 2019), the largest mining event in Morocco was held at Palais des Congres, Marrakech, Morocco from 17th - 19th April 2019. MMC-2019 brought the mining spectrum in its entirety to explore opportunities on a global level. With the enormous support from the Ministry of Energy, Mines & Sustainable Development, Morocco, the event was dedicated to expanding the country’s mining sector, providing knowledge about Morocco’s new mining code, development plans, and standout investment climate. Inaugurated by Hon. Minister of Energy, Mines & Sustainable Development, Morocco, Mr. Aziz Rabbah, the event witnessed the participation of 19 international mining ministries, 90+ international and national companies, 50+ renowned speakers and 400+ delegates. MMC 2019 featured various lucrative conference sessions where emphasis was laid on several important topics like women in mining, mining laws & policies, transparency in the mining sector etc. In tandem with other conference sessions, a parallel session “Mining Challenge by OCP” was hosted by OCP group as a part of their digital transformation and start-up development initiative. Alongside the conference, a three-day exhibition provided an ideal platform for exhibiting companies to display their products and services, helping them increase their brand visibility. The event witnessed the presence of multitude of mining companies with OCP as strategic partner; BKT as gold sponsor; JESA & Managem as silver sponsors; VIST as Bronze sponsor; Yantai Huize Mining Engineering Co. Ltd; Datamine; Gold Pyramid Group; Maya Gold & Silver Inc & JK Tyre as Associate sponsors along with other big names of the mining industry. The exhibition was concluded with a visit to Mohammed VI Polytechnic University and Benguérir mine site by OCP Group. MMC 2019 culminated with successful business deals, knowledge-exchange and networking sessions in presence of hundreds of global attendees giving a boost to Morocco’s mining sector. With the exemplary results from the 1st edition, MMC 2020 is anticipated to be the largest event not only in Morocco but across the African continent.