The International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM) on 13 February 2020 launched its enhanced membership requirements – ICMM’s Mining Principles – which now include site-level validation and transparent disclosure. These requirements seek to maximise the industry’s benefits to host communities and minimise negative impacts to effectively manage issues of concern to society. READ MORE: ICMM publishes updated guidance for community concerns ICMM’s Mining Principles define good
practice environmental, social and governance requirements for the mining
metals industry through a comprehensive set of performance expectations.
Validation of the implementation of the performance expectations takes place at
the site-level for all members’ assets. Validation involves a mix of
self-assessments and independent, third-party assessments, coupled with
transparent disclosure of the outcomes. ICMM’s Mining Principles are aligned
with the objectives of other responsible sourcing initiatives. They establish a
high bar for sustainability practices that many of our member companies
currently apply to manage a broad range of sustainability issues at the
operational level. As a condition of membership for ICMM company members, ICMM’s Mining
Principles will apply to roughly 650 assets in over 50 countries. “Mining and metals are critically important to society – as a catalyst for sustainable social and economic progress and as essential materials for the technologies needed to address climate change – but they must be produced responsibly. READ MORE: ICMM commits to UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights “Societal expectations of the mining
industry encompass a broad range of environmental, social and governance
challenges. Our aim has been to develop a holistic set of requirements that
establish a benchmark for responsible mining practices,” says ICMM COO Aidan Davy. “ICMM’s Mining Principles will support
our members to supply the increasing demand for metals and minerals, while
giving confidence to customers and other stakeholders that they have been
produced responsibly. We encourage all mining companies to embrace good
practice environmental, social and governance requirements.” In 2003, ICMM published its 10 Principles
for sustainable development to set a standard of ethical performance for its
members. Building on this, in early April 2018, ICMM launched a global public consultation on
the introduction of a comprehensive set of performance expectations for how
members should be expected to manage a broad range of sustainability issues. The resulting enhanced Mining
Principles strengthen social and environmental requirements on issues such as
labour rights, resettlement, gender, access to grievance mechanisms, mine
closure, pollution and waste.