ASX-listed Golden Rim
Resources has announced major extensions to mineral resource gold lodes at its
Kouri project in Burkina Faso. Burkina Faso –
Golden Rim made the announcement this week when it released the latest drilling
results from its major exploration campaign at Kouri. The current 9 200 m
reverse circulation (RC) and 4 000 m diamond drilling programme is progressing
well, with 2 774 m of RC drilling (22 holes) and 1 011 m of diamond drilling (7
holes) completed to date. Key points of the latest results Mineral resource extensional Drilling – Kogodou Prospect • Assays are pending for drill holes located up to 700 m
east of the mineral resource in which strong, multiple zones of quartz – pyrite
mineralisation, which is generally associated with gold at Kouri, have been
observed suggesting potential for further extensions to the gold lodes. • Results continue to confirm the potential for a major
strike extension to the east of the mineral resource and into the Kogodou
Prospect where high-grade gold results have been obtained in rock chip sampling
over multiple structures for approximately 4 km. • Drilling is continuing at the Kogodou Prospect with a mineral
resource update scheduled for the June 2020 quarter. Read: Good news for Golden Rim in Burkina Faso Huge potential Commenting on the latest drilling results, Golden Rim’s
Managing Director, Craig Mackay, said: “At present, we are systematically
stepping out to the east of the existing 1.4Moz mineral resource at Kouri,
along a major cross-structure and completing fences of drill holes at 100m
intervals. “To date, we have drilled holes over 700 m to the east of the mineral resource. The results so far have been impressive and we still have a further 3km along this cross-structure to explore. "There are also an additional three cross-structures that we have identified to the east of the mineral resource that have returned high-grade gold in rock chip samples and which are yet to be drilled. We believe the potential to considerably expand the Mineral Resource at Kouri is huge,” he concluded.