ASX- and London-listed potash developer Danakali has commenced a number of work streams as part of the first phase of the engineering, procurement and construction management (EPCM) at its Colluli potash project in Eritrea. East Africa – The Colluli Mining Share Company (CMSC) board approved the establishment of the owner’s project team, which includes key project personnel led by project director, Tony Harrington. All owner’s team personnel will be based at the DRA Global project office in Johannesburg during the first three EPCM phases. Turner & Townsend, a multinational professional services company, will also be providing a number of key members for all phases. FEED review, Water and Geotechnical Study Further to issuing of the notice to proceed, DRA has started the review of the Colluli front end engineering design (FEED), which includes developing and establishing of project systems, project controls and progress measurement monitoring. READ MORE: Danakali appoints mining contractor for Colluli DRA has also commenced project management activities and
mobilised its own engineering group for the process plant and associated
infrastructure work, which has started in Johannesburg. The water intake area design
is being undertaken and commenced at the DRA office in Cape Town. The agreement for the purchase of the reverse osmosis plant is
nearing completion, with the order for critical equipment on track for
February. This facility will be used to provide potable and construction water
prior to the commissioning of the main Anfile Bay water intake area design.
Delivery of the reverse osmosis plant to site is to coincide with mobilisation
of the early works contractor. The plant will consist of a pre-tested
desalination facility for the on-site bores and portable water. Phase 2 will start mid-February, followed by geotechnical investigation works that will commence in March 2020. Data collected will help optimise the geotechnical foundation design and outline any other investigation work if required going forward. READ MORE: Danakali receives first tranche of its US$50 million from AFC "I am very pleased with the progress achieved since commencement,” says Danakali project director, Tony Harrington. “We are near completion in formalising our partnership with DRA and are firmly moving into development phase with some key works and activities in progress. As part of the mobilisation phase (1 & 2) the project team has put in place a robust execution strategy as a basis of delivery throughout the life of the project, which includes controls services, procurement and contracts and logistics coordination, engineering and construction management and HSE,” says Harrington.