LuNa Smelter, the only tin smelter in East Africa, has been certified as conflict-free in accordance with the Responsible Minerals Assurance Process – the flagship programme of the Responsible Minerals Initiative. The successful assessment validates the smelters' company-level
management processes for responsible mineral procurement. As a result of the evaluation, LuNa Smelter is fully compliant to the
requirements of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s
(OECD) Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chain of Minerals as well
as meets the demands of the mineral certification scheme of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). “This is testament to the fact that LuNa Smelter adopts the best due
diligence practices in order to operate in a safe and responsible manner that
respects the environment, employees, customers and the communities in which the
company operates,” says Dr Radoslaw Miskiewicz, the chairman of the supervisory
board of LuNa Smelter. “LuNa Smelter has committed itself to responsible sourcing in its
production of the highest quality tin ingots. This reflects the company
philosophy of value generation with special focus on CO2 trace
limitation along with the sustainable development of the region,” Dr Miskiewicz
adds. “This certification confirms what we have always proven to the world: Rwanda
is a conflict-free source of minerals. We have put in place different measures
including deployment of tag managers at mining concessions to seal and record
minerals produced in order to efficiently monitor and contain potential illegal
dealing in minerals,” says Francis Gatare, the CEO of Rwanda Mines, Petroleum
and Gas Board (RMB). “This achievement is in line with the government's 7-year programme - the National Strategy for Transformation – and contributes to the responsible, sustainable and environmentally friendly development of the mining sector,’ Gatare adds. READ MORE: Investing in a smelter in Rwanda Rwanda is re-designing the mining sector in order to transform mining
resources into key drivers of the country’s growth during the National Strategy
for Transformation. The mining sector in Rwanda is going through a transition, as is the case
with many African countries, moving from its traditional nature of small-scale
exploitation with limited links to the rest of the economy to being a major
foreign currency earner. In achieving this, Rwanda has a vision to become a regional mineral processing hub, adding value to minerals mined in Rwanda and the region before exporting them. READ MORE: Untapped mining opportunities in Rwanda In line with this, LuNa Smelter was established in 2018 by European Industrial Group, Luma Holding in partnership with Rwandan Investment Group, Ngali Holdings. Luna Smelter began producing high quality tin ingots after successful commissioning in 2019.