ASX-listed AVZ Minerals is 95% complete with the definitive feasibility study at the Manono lithium and tin project which is on schedule to be released by the end of 31 March 2020. The Democratic Republic of Congo – Pit dewatering at Roche Dure is now 99% completed, while minor pit floor clean up and final dewatering of residual water continues. AVZ Minerals now has the opportunity to undertake further infill drilling of material underneath the pit that could not be accessed while the pit was flooded, in order to upgrade mineral resource categories from inferred to indicated and from indicated to measured. READ MORE: AVZ Minerals to investigate hydro-electric power station refurbishment The
time taken to conduct this extra sampling will not impact the timeframe of the
release of the DFS. Meanwhile, transport studies undertaken to date to select the most
suitable and cost effective method of transporting Manono’s lithium products to
port, have now been completed. The
analysis of each of the transport studies is being finalised and will be
included in the final DFS. The company has also commenced construction of more sustainable
accommodation facilities at Manono, called Camp Colline. The 30 comfortable, “single-man” quarters accommodation units
recently completed, will be followed by additional accommodation for up to 150
construction personnel, associated kitchen, mess, laundry and recreational
facilities. The early works programme also includes construction of a sewage
treatment facility, a reverse osmosis water treatment plant and additional
power facilities for Camp Colline. “We
are no longer an exploration company having commenced site works for mining and
are migrating towards becoming a fully-fledged mining company,” says AVZ
Minerals MD Nigel Ferguson. “With the DFS expected soon, financing and offtakes to soon follow, we are stepping up to ensure a successful mining operation is established at Manono.” WATCH a fly-through video of the AVZ Minerals' Manono project here