The mining supply chain of the United Kingdom is committed to supporting the development of Africa’s mining sector. Its presence at this week’s Mining Indaba is focused particularly on the theme of responsible mineral development. Along with a strong policy and governance framework, clear human rights policies are an essential requirement of investors and capital markets throughout the mining lifecycle. Read more about investment British companies have world class capabilities in assessing the social and environmental impacts of mining. This work informs strategies that create long-term economic prosperity while protecting biodiversity, ecosystems and the environment. Her Majesty’s Trade Commissioner for Africa, Emma Wade-Smith, will moderate a panel on Wednesday 5 February looking at the strategic management of ESG risks in the mining industry. Sustainable economic development is critical for our long-term prosperity. A collaborative approach to developing mines and their associated infrastructure requirements is essential to maximise the benefits and economic opportunities. Such projects need to deliver value to the region and communities and must be developed to drive towards a more sustainable economic future. With this approach in mind, the UK Government is working with the Government of Guinea, Anglo African Minerals and stakeholders to deliver a corridor development model in Guinea. Read more about mining in West Africa This includes developing a multi-user port, road, rail and power solutions as a catalyst for sustainable economic development. The trade commission will discuss this Guinea Central Corridor project at a panel session on Wednesday 5 February: “Mining as a Catalyst for Regional Collaborative Development”. Her Majesty’s Trade Commissioner for Africa at the UK Department for International Trade, Emma Wade-Smith OBE, says: “A responsible approach to mining and the extractive sector is critical for the long-term success of the mining industry and to mitigate the long-term risks associated with this sector. "United Kingdom companies lead the world in assessing the social and environmental impacts of mining. This means that the UK is ideally placed to drive this important and necessary approach and to convene other responsible actors. I believe the United Kingdom should be the responsible partner of choice in Africa.”