Frequently, mining companies focus on 'climate-improving’ their portfolios by, for example, reducing exposure to coal and increasing exposure to lithium. On the face of it, that
would seem to make enormous sense. But the answer is not so simple. After all, divesting coal assets only shifts the problem to another owner, and several mining companies have destroyed value by over-committing to battery metals such as lithium. Read more about battery metals Adding to the complexity
is that the true impact of climate change is far from certain and so companies
need a sound strategy adaptable to a range of possible scenarios. To structure their
approach to this complexity, mining company executives should consider three
key questions: By conducting scenarios
and simulations—usually three to five – mining companies can start to gauge
various implications on the company’s portfolio and build strategies for
responding effectively. The more diverse their
options for responding and rebalancing their portfolio to minimize exposure the
better. And to carry out these strategies effectively, companies need to align
incentives correctly and hold people accountable. For example, to manage
their portfolios, mining companies need to understand how profit pools will
shift in the future as emissions are curbed. Copper, for example,
looks to benefit from different abatement scenarios, while the story is much
more mixed for other commodities. Some leaders have been
very adept at scanning the market, tracking leading indicators and listening to
“weak signals” for clues about how to restructure their portfolios. For example, early movers
picked up on weak signals about the thermal coal business and decided to exit
early. That probably gave them
an advantage over companies that decide to exit later, especially if the pool
of eligible buyers shrinks or if tougher global carbon regulations crush coal’s
profitability. On the other hand, demand
for coal will likely remain significant in the foreseeable future. And given
that coal capacity expansions are limited, operators that remain in the coal
business may cash in. The upshot? In grappling with portfolio decisions, miners must fully understand the specific context they’re operating in. Exiting coal might be the right choice for some companies, while entering or enhancing exposure to coal could benefit companies owned by specialized PE investors. Read more about coal Shifting towards new
green-energy metals is another example of portfolio innovation—and a very
effective way to build resilience and optionality into the portfolio. Rio Tinto and Alcoa, for
instance, have developed a new method to produce carbon-free aluminum (expected
to be sold by 2024), with support from the Canadian government, the province of
Quebec and technology giant Apple. A climate-change friendly
strategy is at the core of transforming the environment that mining companies
operate in. AUTHOR: Hans Kuipers, MD and Partner at Boston Consulting Group