Finance, tech and juniors will be firmly in the spotlight at this year’s DRC Mining Week. Taking place in Lubumbashi from 17 to 19 June, this will be the 16th edition of the event in the heart of the Copperbelt, which has grown substantially over the last few years. Hon. Willy Kitobo Samsoni, DRC’s Minister of Mines will address the opening session of this year’s conference. Read: Lubumbashi prepares for expanded DRC Mining Week With the support of the Ministry of Mines, the Federation of Congolese Enterprises (FEC) and strategic partners, DRC Mining Week will gather some 5 000 local and international mining stakeholders and influencers in the public and private sector doing business in the country. The event will feature at least international pavilions including Germany, Zimbabwe, China, South Africa, UK, and France. Other early confirmations of high-level industry expert speakers for the event include Amedeo Anniciello, CEO: Standard Bank, DRC, Gustave Nzeng Rubuz: chairman KCC–Glencore, DRC and Richard Robinson: MD Alphamin Bisie Mines, DRC. Focus on the future New at the event this year will be a dedicated Finance and Investment Day to provide insights into the availability of funds and capital to penetrate this challenging but extremely promising strategic market. Another first is the Women in Mining session and Junior Mining Forum that will focus on understanding investors’ mind-sets towards junior mining and discussing how well prepared junior miners are to compete for funding in the DRC, compared to South Africa, Australia and Canada. Read: DRC Mining Week 2020: The countdown has begun Other conference highlights will include a deep dive into commodities to emphasise the DRC’s growing reputation as a sought-after mining investment destination, particularly with regards to battery metals. Says DRC Mining Week event director Elodie Delagneau, “With the surge in the global demand for rechargeable batteries and electric vehicles, the DRC is fast becoming a provider of choice, thanks to the volume and high grade quality of its cobalt and other strategic metals.” The event will also host a Technologies and Innovation session, discussions on developing enablers for value addition in the region; processing and beneficiation and tools for a sustainable value chain. The conference will also look to the future, specifically what the sector may look like in 2050 and the speed of digitisation of mining in the region. The sessions on policies and regulation will unpack how the DRC can improve its business climate to attract more FDI; focus on governance issues and creating a responsible mining culture, traceability and tracking; local skills development and creating a “Made in the DRC” brand and discuss the benefits of legalising artisanal mining in the country. Giving back DRC Mining Week has also renewed its partnership with the local non-profit BUMI, which is focused on helping orphaned and vulnerable children in the Lubumbashi region. Watch: How Bumi is helping orphans and vulnerable children Sarah Moser, project coordinator at BUMI, says being the project of choice as social responsibility outreach programme forDRC Mining Weekhas benefited their organisation as it has raised awareness in the mining sector about the protection of vulnerable children, investment in youth education and support to communities. “We are happy to see that more and more companies are becoming aware of their responsibility and implement social projects, not only to comply with the regulations (i.e. min. 0,3% of revenue for contribution to development projects) but also because they value social investments” says Sarah. Several local mining companies and suppliers have joined forces with BUMI to improve the living conditions of the children they serve. Contact: Event director: Elodie Delagneau  Sponsorship and exhibition: Jean-Tite Oloumoussie  Conference and workshop programmes: Audrey Bading Office telephone: +27 21 7003500 Website: http://www.drcminingweek.com