West African Resources has completed commissioning of the primary crusher ahead of schedule as it prepares for gold production at its Sanbrado Gold Project in Burkina Faso. West African Executive Chairman Richard Hyde comments: “We are very pleased to have crushed the first M5 open-pit ore ahead of schedule at Sanbrado. The overall construction project is tracking ahead of schedule, which is a credit to the skill and experience of WAF’s owners’ team and the quality and cooperation of the contractors and consultants working with us on the build. Read more about gold “Double shift open-pit mining has recently started with over 200,000 t of oxide ore now on the ROM pad. "Commissioning activities are also progressing well, with the project now tracking towards an early Q2 maiden gold pour." Highlights Construction and commissioning activities During the week the primary crushing circuit was successfully commissioned with first ore from M5 processed and conveyed to the coarse ore stockpile. Construction activities are nearing completion with only minor piping and instrumentation work remaining. Mechanical and electrical works are now expected to be completed in late Q1 2020 on all plant and equipment. Read more about mining in West Africa First power from the heavy fuel oil (HFO) medium speed generators is forecast to be on-line in March 2020. Commissioning activities have started and are progressing well on both the process plant and the power station. Introduction of ore downstream of crushing, including water and reagents, is set to begin by late Q1 2020 which should result in first gold by early Q2 2020. Open pit mining Open-pit mining contractor African Mining Services has ramped up mining activities to include both the M5 and M1 South pits, with double shift starting in the last week. Over 200,000 tonnes of oxide ore has been delivered to the ROM pad at average grade of 1.4g/t gold. Underground mining Underground development continues to progress to schedule with mining contractor Byrnecut Offshore, a subsidiary of the Byrnecut Group. The primary ventilation raise bore has now been drilled with back reaming in progress. First development ore is on track for late March and first stoping ore is forecast for Q3 2020.