Manufacturer of vibrating mineral processing equipment Vibramech is exceptionally honoured to have received its largest single order in its 43rd year of operation – to supply over 30 units of vibrating equipment to the latest state-of-the-art marine diamond processing vessel in 2020. The equipment in question ranges from heavy duty/high capacity primary scalping screens to diamond recovery feeders. The large primary scalping screens (the largest operational on sea going processing plants) have been meticulously designed and tailor-made for this specific application and have been designed using the latest finite element and strain gauge techniques. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 1, 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here In 2020,
Vibramech anticipates to maintain its performance of producing over 500 units
per year, and despite a challenging mining environment, expects to show some
growth due to the aforesaid marine diamond processing order. The company remains confident for 2020, as it fully understands the harsh operating conditions which vibrating screens, grizzlies and feeders are subjected to in the mining industry. As such, the company is cognisant that its designs need to cater for both abrasive and corrosive environments. Read: Vibramech: the go-to screen provider in West Africa “Our equipment needs to withstand the high wear associated with the screening of abrasive ores. We also have a range of speciality liner materials, paint specifications and wear prevention compounds which are used to combat the effects of corrosion in the marine and refinery applications. Vibramech even offers the option to install a screen in stainless steel,” explains Vibramech MD David Massey. Read: Vibramech: extensive expertise across Central Africa As sound dynamic behaviour is essential to ensure vibrating equipment reliability, all equipment is built to perform within strict dynamic parameters. All internal mating surfaces are machined in order to maintain stringent dimensional tolerances. In addition, the company’s quality assurance programme makes provision for a full 3D vibration analysis to be conducted on all equipment prior to release. This is used as a benchmark for the life of the equipment. A significant
percentage of the screens supplied are manufactured under the Siebtechnik
license which was awarded to Vibramech in 2005. In particular, Vibramech has
continued to supply 4.3 m wide screens to both local and overseas projects with
numerous screens being supplied into the African market. In addition to conventional screens, Vibramech is the southern African licensee for Hein-Lehmann Liwell screens. These machines have been designed specifically to screen fines from a ‘sticky’ feed in a dry screening operation, and have a worldwide reputation for being the market leader in this field. Vibrator motor and geared exciter repairs form part of Vibramech's service offering, with repairs conducted to OEM specifications. URAS vibrator motors and geared exciters are part of Vibramech’s key product offering, which, along with other OEM vibrator motors and geared exciters, are repaired at Vibramech’s 8 000 m² under crane factory. Vibramech has distributed URAS vibrator motors as part of its vibrating equipment product offering since 1981 and is the exclusive URAS vibrator motor distributor for Africa and the Middle East.