A three-year-long relationship with the Goscor Group has allowed Anzi Plant & Mining Services to grow its footprint in the civils and mining industries in the Western and Northern Cape. The company has an extensive fleet capable of meeting the arduous demands of both sectors. This includes 12 SANY SY956 front-end loaders and two 50 t excavators, as well as 12 skidsteers and TLBs from Bobcat Equipment South Africa. The larger equipment is predominantly used to service large mining clients, while the smaller more flexible equipment is deployed mainly for construction contracts, Anzi Plant & Mining Services MD Theuns Burger explains. Read more TECH NEWS The SANY SY956 features optimum efficiency thanks to its Cummins QSL8.9 engine, which provides maximum power, high efficiency, and large displacement. Multipoint fuel injection allows for immediate throttle response, enhanced fuel efficiency, and reduced noise, while the Cummins engine also complies with the Tier 3 emission standard. The DANA axis-shift transmission with electronic control system is ideal for automatic shifting, maximum efficiency, and an extended 10 000-hour service life. Features include a forward/reverse handle and fingertip controls that make it easy for an operator to switch between left and right hands. A solenoid valve and logic control achieve a much smoother shifting and faster response. Burger comments that Anzi Plant & Mining Services remains positive for 2020, and is looking to extend its fleet even further due to pending contracts in both the construction and mining industries. Read more about mining in southern Africa “We have established long-term relationships with our clients, many of which continue to be active in Africa.” Given the high capex investment in its fleet, Burger points out that aftermarket support and technical back-up are key, which is where Goscor excels. The group is present in all strategic mining and construction areas in the country, which facilitates client service. “Parts availability is no problem, while the workmanship of the Goscor mechanics is always exemplary,” Burger concludes.