Trysome Auto-Electrical Engineering, the largest, single-source supplier of auto-electrical, heavy-duty components, collision avoidance systems and associated technical services in southern Africa is geared to meet the mining industry’s evolving demand to comply with safety legislation which can be achieved through the adoption of innovative technologies in line with Mining Industry 4.0. In an era of extreme volatility in commodity markets, increased operating costs, rapidly declining productivity resulting in staff rationalisation, future gains in efficiency and competitiveness will be driven by the adoption of innovative technologies and processes. This article first appeared in Mining Elites in Africa 2020 Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Trysome CEO Eddie Smith says that
throughout its 28 years of existence, the company has transformed the business
from that of a traditional auto-electrical parts trader to an engineering
entity by adopting the latest technologies to design and build auto-electrical
equipment, with improved manufacturing processes and safety systems able to
solve problems and achieve practical goals for its customers. Fostering global technology partnerships Staying abreast of current market trends, Trysome
continues to broker global partnerships to bring innovative, digital solutions
to the local mining industry with a big focus on real-time information monitoring
systems (RTIMS). Some of the company’s recent collaborations include: Using
digital technology to drive Zero Harm With a serious focus on safety, Trysome has
recently extended its decade-old relationship with digital mining solutions
provider, Hexagon Mining, to help companies throughout southern Africa better
pursue their goal of Zero Harm. This is particularly
welcome news for mining companies seeking the technology and service to comply
with South Africa’s safety regulations for all trackless mobile machinery, such as
trucks. This includes Level-9 autobraking and intervention controls, which
require technologies that automatically intervene and take some form of machine
control to prevent or mitigate an unsafe action. Other solutions offered as part of the partnership
include collision avoidance, operator alertness, personal protection and reverse
assist. Additionally, with
the advent of the hybrid vehicle, which is poised to advance in Africa earlier
than in the rest of the world, Trysome is gearing its product range and
services to cater to the new technologies in electric vehicles. Local content Trysome has traditionally located its operations in the communities where mining is prevalent, both in South Africa and across its borders and is planning to expand its footprint in both territories early in 2020, in line with new demand. By leveraging the
procurement specifications of Mining Charter III, which are driving a change in
strategy and business model with a large focus on local content both in terms
of business ownership and manufacturing content, Trysome has become
increasingly adaptive and resilient, by positioning itself ahead of the game in
this area. The progress made at
its Northern Cape Transformation project is testament to this, with the launch
of two new, local-owned, entities in the Gamagara region in 2019. Change management pivotal in digital era While the development
of the modern mine, a digital and intelligent mine connecting people, processes
and technology with access to data in real time and a technical production
process at the forefront is one of the most important conditions for the future
of mining, having a competent workforce that can handle the technology is
another but equally important condition. Mining companies will need to engage change management techniques to prepare their labour force for the imminent, evolving working environment that new technologies will bring. They will also need to adopt a socio-technical approach where the participation of employees in job design is pivotal in developing a culture of workplace learning and continuous education.