I am encouraged by the progress we’ve made as an industry in reducing emissions and taking a more proactive stance in how we remodel our operations for a carbon-neutral future through displacing diesel power with stable, zero-carbon electricity or green hydrogen. Extracts from Mark Cutifani's (Chief Executive of Anglo American) address at the Investing in African Mining Indaba 2020 Beyond
the “mine gate”, the industry is thinking about the influence we must reduce
emissions along the entire value chain - working with our suppliers, our peers
and our customers where practical, to reduce global emissions. I
believe mines can, and will be, carbon-neutral and will use significantly less
water as well deliver positive biodiversity outcomes. We
have set very ambitious targets for ourselves to reduce Greenhouse Gas
emissions and improve energy efficiency by 30% by 2030. There
is, however, one point that gets lost in the debate, and that is the fact that
the transition to a low carbon economy cannot happen without the products of
mining. The
metals and minerals that we produce are the essential raw materials for all our
modern lives – from the platinum group metals that clean vehicle emissions or
enable hydrogen energy, to the copper essential for renewable energy and all
our phones and other devices. Mining
is the cornerstone of the energy transition, and we are already seeing this
change. On PGMs alone, the Hydrogen Council predicts that 18% of energy demand
by 2050 will be met by hydrogen. This shift has the potential of creating at least four million new jobs globally and contributing significantly to new and clean energy supply across the world. Read more about energy In
South Africa’s case, there is an immense opportunity to lead the global drive
for the development of the hydrogen economy. Last
year, we announced our plan to develop and fuel the world’s largest
hydrogen-powered mine haul truck. This
initiative will mark the first time a truck of this size and load capacity has
been converted to run on hydrogen. South
Africa has an unparalleled opportunity to lead the hydrogen economy through its
abundant endowment of PGMs – and this has innumerable benefits for the
development of sustainable and clean energy. The
picture is equally favourable for copper, which is a critical metal for a new
era of clean, green, renewable energy. Copper is at the heart of every wind turbine, electric vehicle and solar panel, while also helping efficient energy storage. Read more about mining for copper This
brings me to another critical point, and that is the need for us to work collaboratively
with governments on ensuring that the mining industry has an adequate supply of
sustainable, cost-effective and reliable energy, particularly here in South
Africa. None
of us can doubt the impact that rolling power blackouts have on the viability
and competitiveness of South Africa’s economy, including our mining industry. And
there is no better place to start than by drastically streamlining regulatory
processes to enable the establishment of self-generated power that can
supplement Eskom’s constrained capacity. I am
encouraged to hear Minister Mantashe acknowledge that self-generated power in
South Africa will be supported by his Department. This is a positive step in
solving South Africa’s energy crisis. We
believe that the mining sector can play an instrumental role here. There are
several pilot projects in the pipeline already, including our large-scale solar
PV project for the Mogalakwena PGMs Mine, and our role in helping develop the
100MW Kathu Solar Park in the Northern Cape. Creating
a supportive environment for projects such as these can immediately add
additional power to the national grid, ease the burden on Eskom and proactively
help develop sustainable energy that industrial users that power the South
African economy can rely upon. We must act decisively to solve South Africa’s energy crisis to prevent any further loss of momentum for the country’s economy. Read more about mining in southern Africa Mining
in 2020 is an entirely different ball game to when I started my career over 40
years ago. Take productivity, for example: Beyond these obvious physical and technical challenges, mining’s social licence to operate is under significant strain – particularly if we consider the persistent challenges we face in managing mining’s impact on communities and the environment. Read more about the environment And it
is also an exciting time for mining. Across the world, our industry is on the
cusp of a significant change led by the accelerating pace of technological
innovation. Digitalisation,
automation and artificial intelligence are all opening opportunities for the
industry to be safer, as well as more productive and environmentally and
socially sustainable. At the
same time, the industry is also tackling the challenge of becoming better
connected to the needs of our host communities and society in its broader
sense. In thinking about the next decade and what it holds, it is important to reflect on the power of being purposeful in how we envisage the future of mining.