The
latest data released by Statistics SA show that mining production decreased by
3.1 percent year-on-year in November 2019. The largest contributors to the decline in production were platinum group metals (PGMs), coal, and iron ore. On the positive side, however, “non-metallic” minerals made significant positive contribution to production. Since
the beginning of 2019 some commodity prices showed marked improvement; thus,
helping several mining companies to improve their balance sheets and register healthy
profits. Average prices for most commodities are expected to remain relatively flat or have marginal growth in 2020 and beyond. This will provide a better basis for most mining projects in the coming years. Read: Minister Mantashe, the world will be listening at Mining Indaba Demands
of the 4th Industrial Revolution present new growth opportunities for the mining
industry. The industry must position itself to take advantage of this reality. South
African mining has great benefits for investors and South Africans across the value
chain. In
2019, in response to the President’s R1 trillion Investment Drive, the Department
granted 28 new mining rights in coal; iron ore; manganese. Estimates are that;
a potential of 4 800 jobs will be created from these and there will be a
billion Rands capital expenditure. We must work together to convert these rights into active projects that can deliver the much-needed revenue and jobs. Job
losses in the mining sectors We have noted with concern the recent announcements for planned retrenchments. Read: Mining Indaba 2020 will help junior miners secure funding The
2018/19 Annual Report of the CCMA highlights Section 189 retrenchments in the mining
sector as the second largest contributor of job losses after the construction sector. Stakeholders
and social partners and the Department must dialogue to find ways against job
losses. Legislative
and policy interventions Transforming
of the economy and creating jobs is one of the seven apex priorities for the 6th
democratic administration, declared by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Policy and regulatory
certainty are key to attracting investments. To
this end, we remain committed and continue to work with the investor community
on improving our regulatory framework to provide such certainty. We
have advanced with the separation of the upstream legislative provisions for
oil and gas from traditional minerals. In December 2019, we gazetted the draft
Upstream Petroleum Development Bill for public comments. Since
then, we have been receiving positive comments on the Bill and this is a signal
to us that we are on the right path. Electricity
as a driver for growth in mining Economic growth and sustainability are bolstered in an environment of a secure and reliable electricity supply. Addressing Indaba 2019, President Ramaphosa outlined measures being considered to address the electricity supply challenges. Read: Hot topics at the Investing in African Mining Indaba 2020 To this end, in October last year, we gazetted the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) – the country’s blueprint for long-term electricity generation options; which provides for a diversified energy mix. Following
concurrence by energy regulator, NERSA, we are in the process of gazetting a
revised Schedule 2 of the Electricity Regulation Act; which will enable
selfgeneration; and facilitate municipal generation options under “Distributed
Generation”. This will help close the energy gap caused by deteriorating Eskom plant performance. Read more about energy Depending
on the circumstances, the generation plant may only require registration and
not licensing. Furthermore,
in December 2019, we issued a Request for Information (RFI) – inviting responses
from the market on innovative potential solutions to deliver power generation
to the grid as expeditiously as possible. We
welcome all inputs from the market, these will give the Department a sense of
possible immediate generation options available in the next three to twelve
months to fill the short to medium term gap. As we focus on energy security, we are also attending to the just transition towards low-carbon emissions. The Council for Geoscience (CGS), therefore, is looking at frontier coalfields and the establishment of additional generation capacity in support of carbon capture storage and utilisation (CCUS). To increase energy efficiency, the CGS will further investigate the potential of carbon utilisation in contributing to enhanced geothermal energy generation and improved extraction of coal-bed methane. Together
with Anlgo Platinum, the Department – through our agency Mintek; are working on
using hydro-fuel cells as an energy source for the mining trucks. The intention
is to replace diesel usage with hydro-fuel cell technology. This is a major and innovative project that will have a significant impact on low carbon emissions and cost effectiveness. It is also an example of good partnership between Government and Business. Read more about investment In
addition to these initiatives, we are seeking solutions to network
infrastructure challenges facing the mining sector, namely rail and port
infrastructure, by engaging the Department of Public Enterprises. Community
Development and Social Licence Mining companies must take seriously the communities on whose land they mine. The 10 value-creating principles for a more modern, successful and productive mining industry, referred to by President Ramaphosa in 2019, challenge mining right-holders on what they should do as part of their license conditions and as part of their social license to operate. In our assessment of the implementation of social and labour plans last year, we found that 108 SLPs have been implemented, to the value of just over R600 million. We
commend those who are playing their part towards the creation of a growing, inclusive,
competitive and transformed mining industry. We urge all investors to prioritise
this matter. Turning
South African into an exploration site We
want to see more exploration taking place. The intention is to grow the
national target from below 5% to respectable levels within the next few years.
Government has, therefore, invested in the integrated and multi-disciplinary
geoscience mapping programme. Early
results are uncovering previously undefined geological features that may host
significant mineral wealth. For example, recently defined extensions of greenstone
belts that may host hydrothermal mineral deposits and alkaline complexes. These
may yet prove to host rare earth elements and other critical mineral resources. I
am informed that the CGS has developed the data policy; in order that key data
and knowledge generated throughout this programme will be made available to the
public through the CGS data portal. Industrial
development and beneficiation We
can create significant value, grow the economy and create employment opportunities
through local processing and beneficiation. As
part of our efforts in this regard, we are in the process of developing a
mining and beneficiation masterplan for the sector, as part of implementation
of the Mining Leadership Compact, and to grow the contribution of the
mineral-energy complex to the economy. Furthermore,
Government, through its mining research entity Mintek, is involved in programmes
aimed at identifying and supporting local beneficiation; such as: Health
and safety status in the industry Health
and safety of employees is a key priority. Together we made significant progress
in 2019, reducing fatalities from 81 in 2018 t0 51 in 2019. This
is our record low, and evidence that a fatality-free mining industry is
possible. We must redouble our efforts to reach our goal of zero harm. Conclusion The
mining and energy portfolio is critical to economic growth and development. The
merging of the two Departments asserts their mutually reinforcing nature. This
should result in a Department that is adequately capacitated, efficient and
responsive to the needs of the industry and the economy broadly. South Africa and the African continent are important to global mining and its development. They should be the destination of choice for the investment community.