The Annual Investing in African Mining Indaba has grown into the most comprehensive gathering of mining companies, investors, governments, mine solution providers and media on the continent. For the past two years it has also afforded junior miners the opportunity to compete for investor funding in the ‘Investment Battlefield’. This year an actual boxing ring in the main exhibition area of the event served as the stage for the contenders. Read: Prospect Resources wins 2019 Investment Battlefield Mark Strizek, MD of Tietto Minerals impressed the judges with their entry: Fast tracking the development of the Abujar Gold Project, and emerged as the ultimate Battlefield winner. The project is located approximately 30km from the major regional city of Daloa in central western Côte D’Ivoire and the current resource stands at 45.5Mt @ 1.5g/t Au for 2.15Moz of contained gold. Any emerging mining company with projects in Africa with a market cap of $50m or below is eligible to apply and an initial screening sees successful applicants grouped according to commodity and lifecycle stage. Read: Orion Minerals takes 2nd place at Investment Battlefield 2019 From this point they are invited to pitch their project to the investor judges, where they have just five minutes to put their best business case forward, after which judges provide feedback for ten minutes. Not only do the emerging miners get the opportunity to pit their project against those of their peers, but also receive invaluable feedback based on the expertise of the judges. A series of knock-out rounds gradually reduces the contenders until an ultimate winner is identified. Each year, judges are selected from prominent investment organisations. This year, the final battle between junior miners was judged by George Cheveley, Portfolio Manager, Investec Asset Management; Heidi Sternberg, Sector Specialist Mining, Public Investment Corporation; Erez Ichilov, MD, Traxys Projects; and Jonathan Cordero, Head of Corporate Development, Eurasian Resource Group. By the
third and final day of the Investment Battlefield programme, Tietto Minerals
was joined in the final round by: In
announcing the winner, Dominic
Piper, Editor, Paydirt Media spoke of the key features of Tietto Minerals’ pitch and said they had
taken three things into consideration in their final selection: the strength of fundamentals of the
commodity; the quality of the asset; and the quality of the team itself in
realising shareholder value. Commenting on the win, Mark Strizek acknowledged the strength of the competition and said it would give Tietto Minerals a chance to raise their profile and gain new investors and shareholders. As winner, they receive: The runner up receives: