Dust-Act has a broad range of custom designed dust suppression solutions specifically tailored for mining, industrial and agricultural markets. Plant, fog cannon and haul road dust suppression should not only be viewed from a health, safety and environmental compliance matter, but also from value-add perspective (ROI – return on investment). This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 6, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here It is key to understand that when selecting the correct dust suppression solution, there are significant value-add (ROI), to name a few: In addition to the immediate quantifiable savings, one can also look at the potential energy efficiency saving Incentives as currently offered by South African government – Section 12L energy efficiency rebate which has been extended until 2022 financial year-end (African countries to follow suite). Once the correct dust suppression solution has been applied to your operations haul road and ROI is realised, your haul road and dust suppression solution will no longer just be an expense but be converted into a linear asset. Tailored for all environments Dust-Act is cognisant that its solutions needs to cater for various sectors of the market. The company’s quality assurance programme is key in ensuring that the best solution is proposed. Historical meteorological data is reviewed including various tests performed, during the initial solution selection, with specific attention given to: In addition to new projects, Dust-Act strives to improve its previously installed systems by providing clients with augmentations to their existing systems. Dust-Act has steadily grown its market share from 2008 focusing on plant dust suppression systems and expanded to offering road solutions in 2014. The Dust-Act Group of Companies has recently also expanded its operations into Africa and concluded a contract with a Global Gold Mining Corporation with other projects soon to follow. “We are proud to introduce various new measurement solutions to the market; the approach with these solutions are based on real-time monitoring. “This will allow the end user to have a pro-active approach when it comes to his/her operations, instead of a costly re-active/delayed response,” explains commercial director, Werner De Kock.