It is fair to say that although the South African mining industry represents 8% of our GDP and employs approximately 450 000 people, by 2019 figures, it is SA’s sweetheart industry. The mining industry was one of the first industries to be permitted to resume activities during the lockdown (and in some instances did not even fully shut down at all). Mining is a sunset industry.  Minerals are finite.  Their extraction becomes more challenging every year as mines have to go bigger and deeper to access minerals. At some point we will run out of mineable resources, but for now it is projected that there are still approximately $2,5 trillion of mineral resources in the country.  No picture of SA’s future is complete without taking into account what mining can contribute. Any prediction of the industry’s future must inevitably consider the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic globally, but must also consider what transpired over the past quarter of a century since the dawn of our democracy. In the mid to late 1990’s, mining was controlled by approximately seven large mining groups. They operated like mini-governments and had large service departments, including research and development budgets. The re-entry of South Africa’s mining industry into the global economy has contributed to the fundamental restructuring of the old “mining house” system as doors opened to international investment and movement of currencies relaxed. Over the past 25 years, we have seen: The COVID-19 pandemic may prove to be the ultimate disruptor or accelerator of change to the industry where the normal strategies of risk mitigation such as weathering currency and commodity fluctuations may prove ineffective. In looking forward there are three themes that will drive the metamorphosis of the industry: The future may very well look a little like the past.  We should anticipate the consolidation of mining interests and operations over the next few years into the next decade.  In the post pandemic jungle, the evolution of the mining industry will ensure that only the fittest survive.  To be able to capitalise on these opportunities, mining companies will need to be bigger and stronger. Read more about COVID-19 But these trends were there before COVID-19 anyway – all that will happen now is that the financial stresses on small and medium mining operations will accelerate the process where financially distressed mining operations are the low hanging fruit to the astute mining investor. AUTHOR: Wessel Badenhorst, Partner – Hogan Lovells Johannesburg