With its sights set on increased business in Australasia, Weba Chute Systems has concluded an agency agreement with Melbourne-based Mincore. The move marks another significant step in the South African OEM’s strategy of extending its global reach. Based in Germiston near Johannesburg, Weba Chute Systems boasts more than 4,500 transfer point systems successfully operating in countries across the world – with 211 of these in Australia. “We opened our Australian office in Perth in 2011, focusing mainly on the western side of Australia and the iron ore market,” says Weba Chute Systems sales director Farouk Abrahams. “Due to the vast size of Australia – and the extent of its mining industry – Mincore will cover areas particularly in central and eastern Australia.” Abrahams says Mincore will also cover international markets such as Papua New Guinea (PNG) and South-East Asia. Mincore is an established engineering company involved in design, supply and construction services of crushing, material handling, screening, stockpiling, reclaiming and grinding to the resources, mining and building material industries. “With its wide range of customers and contacts in mining and engineering, Mincore is well placed to support us in promoting our bespoke transfer chute engineered solutions,” he says. “The company also has extensive experience of working with our chutes at mine level, so have the necessary expertise relating to our products.” He highlights that Mincore has its own team of experienced materials handling design engineers, estimators and project managers, as well as a specialist Weba Chute Systems applications designer. This enhances the synergy between the two companies, placing the agency appointment on an ideal footing for a successful long-term partnership. “As the world’s leading provider of custom-engineered transfer point solutions, we are excited by the prospects of working with a company which has the depth of expertise of Mincore,” he says. “We both recognise the value of bespoke solutions and have the same high level of engineering knowledge and experience that customers expect.” Weba Chute Systems has built its success on a scientific approach to the dynamics of bulk materials handling at transfer points. Through in-depth field studies almost three decades ago, the company analysed the negative and cost-incurring aspects of conventional chute design. Its solutions to mining and other industries since then have successfully eliminated the problems that were identified in this research. Further information on Mincore is available here