As part of its overall drive to fight COVID-19 and in the implementation of its 10-point plan the Minerals Council South Africa and its members place a great deal of emphasis on education and communication both for employees and communities. Nationally and internationally the issue of stigmatisation of COVID-19 has significant ramifications for reporting, for behaviour and for people getting treatment. Stigmatisation is driven by fear, particularly the fear of the unknown. In mining, we recognise that stigmatisation has an impact at various levels: The Minerals Council and its members are making every effort to address stigmatisation by: During a media briefing today, Minerals Council members shared some of the approaches that they are taking to dealing with stigma and risk behaviour. Exxaro Resources shared examples of the company’s campaign to directly address stigma by focussing on 10 basic truths, and in so doing calling out myths. Some of these basic truths are: The campaign has not only been driven intensely within the company, but also in communities though street pole advertising. A further component on the campaign has been to use ‘real’ people as part of the initiative, including people with have been ill and recovered. Seriti Resources shared details of the way in which the company sought to pre-empt any stigmatisation of employees who had recovered from COVID-19 when returning to work. The key messages of this campaign, led by the CEO, were to: remind everyone of the company’s core values; that virus is not picky and does not discriminate – anyone can get it; that finding cases early is a good thing and shows that the systems work; and that after 14 days of isolation, individuals will be virus free. This was supported by a range of materials – a brief, posters, meetings, and messaging on the company’s mobile app. In its presentation Harmony illustrated how it was dealing with the issue of quarantine, educating people within the company and in the community, what quarantine entailed, why it is necessary. Harmony’s programme included print material, live reads on radio and active engagement with individuals who were quarantined when they returned to work or as a result of contact tracing. Finally, Gold Fields’ South Deep mine spoke about the mine’s holistic and multi-platform approach to communication and education that encompasses the full life of an employee – at work, at home, in his/her community and while commuting. South Deep’s programme incorporates myth-busting and the provision of factual information and runs on a number of platforms – briefs, videos, posters, WhatsApp channel and Facebook. Read more about COVID-19 Importantly, it reaches out to and extends into the community, encouraging employees to be ambassadors and educators. Read more about the Minerals Council’s 10-point plan The presentation on some of these initiatives can be found here