The World Coal Association has announced the appointment of July Ndlovu, CEO of Anglo American’s coal business in South Africa, as its new Chairman. The WCA represents responsible global industry players who are committed to shaping a sustainable future for coal. The appointment of  Ndlovu brings new leadership for the WCA in key global markets, with South Africa being a major supplier to emerging economies. Michelle Manook, WCA Chief Executive, welcomes Ndlovu to the role, stating: “I warmly welcome July Ndlovu into the role of WCA Chairman to support our organisation. We find ourselves at a pivotal moment for the industry. “Our world still needs coal. With a clear strategy in place, we seek to work with governments, investors, and key industry players to uphold global expectations and ensure that all policies are inclusive of all forms of energy. “We have a real opportunity and a responsibility to our employees, peer industries, governments, shareholders, and communities which are supported globally. Read more about coal “The entire coal industry must transform, transition, and work together meaningfully to meet these expectations and deliver the sustainable future that clean coal can bring, to both economic growth and everyday life.” Ndlovu joined Anglo American in 2001 and was appointed CEO of the group’s coal business in South Africa in 2016. Prior to this, he was Executive Head of Processing at Anglo American’s Platinum Group Metals business and was employed by Anglo American subsidiaries in Zimbabwe, where he held senior managerial positions in metallurgical operations and technical services. Ndlovu states: “I am honoured to chair the WCA at a time when the role of responsible coal is front and centre. Our industry provides access to reliable and affordable energy for many countries, particularly in the developing world, while also supplying an essential steel-making ingredient for global infrastructure development. “Our role is to ensure that we meet both our customers’ needs and society’s expectations of us, including by working together to deliver a new era of clean technologies.” Manook has also thanked WCA’s outgoing Chair, Glenn Kellow, President and CEO of Peabody: “On behalf of the WCA and its membership, I’d like to thank our previous Chairman, Glenn Kellow, for his contribution and leadership of the WCA over his two-year term. “Kellow has been committed to reshaping the industry through the development of our ‘Evolving Coal’ strategy and the WCA continues on this path to change the future of coal.”