Metso Outotec, a unique new company with leadership in sustainable minerals and metals processing and recycling technologies began operating on 1 July 2020. As sustainable processing of the world’s natural resources is becoming a norm within the industries, Metso Outotec is driving the transformation. Headquartered in Finland and listed in Nasdaq Helsinki, Metso Outotec employs over 15 000 professionals in more than 50 countries and its illustrative combined sales for 2019 were about € 4.2 billion. The company offers its customers crushing and screening equipment for the production of aggregates​ as well as equipment and solutions for minerals processing, metals refining, chemical processing, and metal and waste recycling. READ MORE: Metso and Outotec Oyj set for merger Metso Outotec’s industry-leading service capabilities and global network are complemented with a comprehensive range of spare and wear parts, refurbishments and professional services. Metso Outotec brings together a long history of technological leadership, customer focus and excellence in services, leveraging the strengths of both companies. The benefits to customers and other stakeholders are unmatched in the industry: full offering that ranges from ore body​ to metal, extensive global services network and significant investment in R&D, allowing the company to create sustainable technologies to the customers’ benefit. The combination offers potential for significant cross-selling and cost synergies and an even stronger platform for innovation, digital leadership and growth. The partner for positive change The growing interest towards the environment and the impacts of climate change, urbanisation, decreasing ore grades and electrification are forcing traditional industries like aggregates, minerals processing and metals refining to redefine their license to operate. Metso Outotec can drive these industries towards a responsible use of the world’s natural resources. ”It is our core expertise to help our customers transform the industry. We offer sustainable technologies and services that reduce the consumption of energy and water by increasing process efficiency, recycling and reprocessing of tailings and waste. ​Our extensive offering and expertise help our customers improve their business and lower their risks. We are their partner for positive change,” says Metso Outotec President and CEO Pekka Vauramo. 