Message from Menar’s Executive ChairmanVuslat Bayoglu Canyon Coal is very fortunate to have an extremely dedicated, dynamicyoung workforce that adapted quickly to changes in operatingenvironments in the past few months. Colleagues’ commitment to keep the wheels turning, while taking thenecessary precautions to best deal with the realities of the COVID-19pandemic in South Africa continues to be exceptional. Canyon Coal is in full support of President Cyril Ramaphosa’sdeclaration of the state of national disaster and the regulationsimplemented to reduce infection rates and give our healthcare systemtime to prepare for the potential surge. Even before the lockdown was declared in South Africa on 26 March2020, Canyon Coal had put in place measures to mitigate the impactsof COVID-19. These included ordering masks and sanitisers for staff,improving hygiene awareness by emphasising the need to wash handsregularly and practicing social distancing, among others. You can readmore about the measures that have been put in place in this edition ofThe Maroon Post. Notwithstanding the measures we instituted, we didn’t lose ourmomentum. During the first 21 days we were able to seamlesslytransition to using digital communication and collaboration platforms, tocontinue to communicate with colleagues without any major disruptionsto our business. This is evidenced by the fact that Khanye Collieryachieved a new monthly production record by processing 204 480 tonsof run of mine coal in June. Canyon Coal is committed to increasing safeproduction tonnages. COVID-19 has however, delayed our schedule for the development ofour new mining projects, as some of the government departments thatneed to grant approval for projects to progress, have been operating atlimited capacity owing to lockdown restrictions. Nonetheless, I am confident that we have everything under control andlook forward to our next exciting project, which will be De Wittekrans.Around R1.6-billion will be invested in De Wittekrans, which will be anopencast and underground mine with an estimated life of mine ofapproximately 24 years based on a run-of-mine production ofapproximately 300 000 ton a month and create about 430 jobs. We willstart development work on it as soon as possible. The other project that we also aim to start developing this year isPalmietkuilen. It will cost around R1.5 billion to develop and createabout 800 jobs. Palmietkuilen will be an opencast mine producing 600000 tons of coal a month at steady state production with a life of mineof about 22 years. We are very optimistic about the future of our business as we continuebeing a low-cost operator, taking care of our colleagues’ health andsafety – which is our top priority. We are still pushing hard to achieve ourtarget of producing 20 million tons of run of mine coal per annum, oncewe receive all pending required approvals. Collectively we have had to tighten our belts and enact cost cuttingmeasures, wherever possible, to ensure the long-term sustainability ofthe business. Nonetheless, I think we are heading in the right direction.Although our time tables have been delayed, they have been by nomeans derailed. The coal price remains under pressure due to a variety of factorsincluding international trade and political tensions. Further strain hasbeen placed on the market due to global lockdowns, which havecurtailed industrial business activity particularly in the Indian Peninsula,which is a major destination for South African export coal. Locally, Eskom saw a decrease of around 7 000 MW of powergeneration, equating to about 20% of total demand. Our projects arebeing developed with the intent to provide Eskom with the right qualitycoal at a competitive price depending on its needs to support therevitalisation of South Africa’s economy. However, as lockdown restrictions are eased globally, we foresee asteady recovery as countries will start rebuilding their economies andwill require raw materials for energy and industrial purposes, such assteel production. This will present new opportunities for the companyand the South African coal sector. As you will read in this edition, we continue to support job creation, tocreate procurement opportunities for local communities, to undertakecommunity development projects and business development initiatives,which form part of our social and labour plan (SLP) and local economicdevelopment (LED) requirements. These are difficult times for our country and the world at large. However,by putting in proactive measures and adapting to the new realities, weare confident that we will emerge better and stronger.