In line with its vision to be the leading integrator of sensor-based sorting innovation, proudly South African minerals processing company Imilingo Mineral Processing is leveraging its turnkey engineering capability. This ranges from process design through to execution, to provide innovative sorting solutions to help address the mining industry’s challenges, MD JACO PRINSLOO tells CHANTELLE KOTZE. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 4, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Since the company’s establishment in 2014, Imilingo has supplied a number of bespoke sorting solutions to operations to the African mining industry. It is currently working on projects for Lucara Botswana, Gem Diamonds Innovation Solutions and recently completed a study for a modular XRT diamond exploration plant for North Arrow Minerals in Canada – as the company continues to expand and grow its global footprint. Read more about diamonds and gemstones Fit-for-purpose sorting solutions Imilingo has developed a number of modular and ‘containerisable’ products for the mining industry, which can either be used as standalone products to complement existing onsite infrastructure, or which can be used to create a fit-for-purpose sorting system. The company’s iPlant 750 is a complete modular X-Ray Transmission (XRT) solution. The iPlant, which comprises a range of Imilingo’s products including iFeed, iScreen, iPCS and iConvey is deployable onsite within one to two weeks. This innovation is made possible by the plug-and-play interlocking nature of the different modules via iDaisyChain, explains Prinsloo. “All iPlant modules are pre-assembled and factory tested, while the standalone iPlant modules can be broken down to fit into standard 40-foot shipping containers for transportation.” Read more TECH NEWS In addition to the iPlant, Imilingo also conceptualised, designed and fabricated two dredging units – namely the iDredge – a 6 x 6m modular dredging unit, as well as the iDredgeXRT, a large 20 x 20 m unit that combines the dredging capability of the iDredge with on-board XRT sorting. These dredging products were developed in direct response to a need from the alluvial diamond industry, yet can also be used in similar alluvial mining applications. Modular conveyor reduces on-site construction time Imilingo is also able to service smaller mining operations with unique needs, such as quick-to-erect conveyor systems. Imilingo’s iConvey product – which is 750 mm wide and either 20 or 30 m in length – is a foldable conveyor belt that has been designed for modularity. The iConvey is fully commissioned at the Imilingo facility and can be deployed on site within four hours by simply unfolding the conveyor unit and connecting it to a power source. “This provides a significant time saving benefit compared with traditional conveyor installation’s which need to be constructed, assembled and commissioned on site,” explains Prinsloo. The iConvey features full electrical integration innovation and is fitted with circuit breakers, soft start, e-stops and lighting as well as safety interlock switches including belt slip and misalignment. The iConvey can meet the needs of both small or larger more complex mining operations and can therefore be purchased as a single conveyor unit or as multiple conveyor units. It can also be used in conjunction with a containerised control room, namely iPCS, which can be interlocked with all other iPlant modules and controlled via iDaisyChain, which also serves as a control room, motor control centre, office and spares storage space. New facility meets growing demand In line with continued growth in demand for its products, Imilingo has aligned its capability and service offering with this through the establishment of modern and fit-for-purpose head office and workshop facility. Located in Centurion, Gauteng, the company’s facility features a 500 m2 corporate office space, a 3 000 m2 under-roof fabrication and assembly workshop and a 6 500 m2 external storage and final assembly area.