Utilising MICROMINE’s field logging solution, Geobank Mobile, to ensure the quality, integrity and usability of exploration sample data, Australian gold company Bardoc Gold continues to uncover major growth potential at its 3.02-million-ounce Bardoc Gold Project, 50 km north of Kalgoorlie in Western Australia. Recent results from reverse circulation (RC) drilling below Bardoc Gold’s existing El Dorado Deposit have not only confirmed a broad zone of high-grade mineralisation but have suggested that the grade profile is improving at depth. Bardoc Gold’s Chief Executive Officer, Robert Ryan, said the impressive results had given the company confidence to remobilise the RC drill rig and target additional extensions while they await further results and analysis from the 2019 drill program. The project has depended on Geobank for reliable, flexible and convenient data management solutions after previous issues with inaccurate historical data had presented difficulties in locating old drill holes. Ian Whitehouse Product Strategy Manager, Geobank said, “All Bardoc Gold RC samples are now geologically logged directly into hand-held Geobank devices.” “Geobank’s reliable, secure database and critical checking and verification process minimises the likelihood of inaccurate and lost data, while the flexibility of Geobank Mobile means that data can be logged at or near the point of detection, reducing errors and ensuring safe and relational data storage.” “This data is also synchronised to a central database and is accessible to teams at different locations.” Whitehouse said that critical business decisions such as Bardoc Gold’s exploration progression could only be made with confidence when informed with accurate and reliable data. “Geobank provides this peace of mind,” he said. Bardoc Gold has resumed its RC drilling program targeting additional resource growth and discovery opportunities across the project area to support a project-wide resource update later this year. Read more about the Bardoc Gold resource extension drill program here. To learn more about how Geobank Mobile can enhance your mining exploration efforts, see our product information here.