Golden Star Resources has advise that further to the news release dated May 14, 2020 announcing a COVID-19 case within its Prestea team, a second team member has tested positive for COVID-19. Both employees have had mild symptoms and are being closely monitored. Consistent with the Company’s COVID-19 management protocols and those of the Ghana Health Service, contact tracing has been carried out and as a result close to 60 members of our Prestea team are currently in quarantine and awaiting test results. Of these, the majority are involved in mining activities (including rock breaking, scoop operations and blasting) and engineering activities (including winder operations and pumping). As a result, site management is revising planned operations in the short-term in order to ensure the safety of all team members and to allow for possible critical skill shortages. This is likely to have some impact on production from 24 Level over the coming weeks until employees who are currently in quarantine are able to safely return to work. At this stage, it is anticipated that the impact on development activities on 17 Level, which are crucial to the longer term viability of the operation, will be minimal. At present, no confirmed or suspected cases of COVID-19 have been identified at Wassa and operations remain unaffected. To the extent the situation remains unchanged, given the current strong operational performance at Wassa, the Company continues to be on track to achieve its consolidated annual guidance for 2020. As previously reported, the supply chains at the Wassa and Prestea mines have not been impacted nor has the export and sale of gold doré. Read more about COVID-19 The safety and well-being of Golden Star’s employees and contractors is paramount and it will continue to proactively implement COVID-19 prevention and management controls across the business whilst providing available leadership, education and support to its host communities. Read more about the Prestea gold mine