The Department of Mineral Resources and Energy has issued Guidelines for a Mandatory Code of Practice (COP) on the Mitigation and Management of COVID-19 (Guideline). Employers have until 25 May 2020 to implement the COP. Prior to the implementation of the mandatory COP, employers are required to comply with the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), in addition to all relevant regulations and directives. Once effective (from 25 May) employer’s will be assessed against compliance with the Guideline. Failing to prepare and implement a COP in line with the Guideline is a breach of the Mine Health and Safety Act (MHSA) and a criminal offence. The COP aims to ensure that mine employees and any other persons at mines are protected from transmission of COVID-19 at the workplace and now also notably “where reasonably practicable in the community”. The Guideline assists employers in establishing and maintaining a COVID-19 prevention, mitigation and management programme at mines and provides several key considerations which employers must bear in mind in drafting and implementing their COP’s. The Guideline requires that procedures be put in place to be followed by employees to exercise their rights in terms of section 23 of the MHSA during the COVID-19 outbreak. The intention appears to be that a specific COVID-19 related procedure dealing with section 23 of the MHSA be prepared as reference has not been made to existing procedures dealing with section 23 of the MHSA. The Guideline must be read in conjunction with existing regulations and directives and should be overseen by appointed COVID-19 compliance officer in conjunction with existing managerial systems. The Guideline provides for five key elements to be addressed in the mine’s COP, summarised below: Risk assessment & review – employers must conduct a risk-based assessment. The Guideline requires that the risk assessment covers all workings at the mine and lists the minimum considerations that must be included in the risk assessment including aspects such as all sources of transmission, operations and workplaces with potential risk of transmission, occupations and skills that may be impacted and the risk of vulnerable employees while at work. Control measures include the de-densification of employees, review of human resources policies and frequent monitoring. Employers must conduct a risk-based assessment considering the World Health Organisation‘s (WHO) classification of SARS-CoV-2 infection risk groups, namely: The risk assessment must be reviewed regularly and whenever circumstances arise or change at the mine that could have an impact on the original assessments and the risk of contracting COVID-19 in the workplace. Start-up & on-going procedure for mines – employers must develop a safe start-up procedure. The start-up procedure in the COP must be aligned with previously issued instructions from the Chief Inspector of Mines. Some aspects that must be addressed include: Management Programme – employers must develop a mitigation & management programme. The employer must set out a mitigation and management programme in order to manage the transmission of infection. The Guidelines list key principles that the employer must consider: Employers must consider several topics when preparing the COP. Some of these are: Monitoring & reporting – employers must record and report COVID-19 cases in the workplace The Guideline requires the employer’s COVID-19 steering committee to develop a system for investigating all confirmed COVID-19 positive cases at the mine and recording and reporting such information to the NICD and the health and safety structure in the workplace. The steering committee must also consolidate the NICD reports into a monthly report, which is then reported to the Principal Inspector of Mines. The employer must report confirmed positive cases at the mine to the Principal Inspector of Mines with 24 hours and conduct investigations in terms of section 11(5) of the MHSA. Compensation – employers must apply for compensation on behalf of the employee. The employer must follow the process stipulated in the Notice on Compensation for occupationally acquired COVID-19. The SOP The Guideline Read more about COVID-19 AUTHORS: Kate Collier and Tsholofelo Mofokeng from Webber Wentzel