Real-time computer-based mine optimisation solutions provider, Modular Mining, has launched its Modular Mining Public Application Programming Interface, aimed at improving mining technology interoperability. The new Application Programming Interface, or API, is designed for superior integration and increased openness among third-party technologies and Modular Mining’s IntelliMine portfolio, including the DISPATCH Fleet Management and ProVision Machine Guidance systems. Read more TECH NEWS Through the Public API infrastructure, bi-directional data sharing is possible among the industry-leading DISPATCH and ProVision systems and third-party programs, helping to increase productivity, operational efficiency, and overall value to the mines. The release of up- and down-stream third-party integration is Modular Mining’s first step towards mine wide optimization, the company said. The Public API provides the Modular Mining mine management ecosystem with access to previously unavailable information, to supplement existing decision-making algorithms, automate tasks, and avoid duplication among systems. It also enhances third-party systems by providing real-time read-only access to various endpoints including equipment positioning data, equipment status changes, and equipment cycle state changes. In addition, the API provides write access to various entry points including location status, road state, and crusher telemetry. The Public API is based on industry standards, including OpenAPI and AsyncAPI technical specifications and employs both REST with JSON for request/response patterns and WebSockets for publish/subscribe patterns. “As industry needs have evolved, we’ve come to understand that integration is increasingly more important and that we can’t solve all problems in the mining value chain ourselves,” said Lourens du Plessis, VP for Customer Value at Modular Mining. “The Public API allows us to collaborate with other technology providers to deliver enhanced value to the industry.” The Modular Mining Public API includes components such as: