ASX-listed Force Commodities has completed a drilling campaign at the Small Canyon prospect of the high-grade lead and silver Tshimpala project, located in the Dowa District of the Republic of Malawi. Force completed a reverse circulation drilling (RC) programme at Small Canyon comprising 26 RC holes for a total 742 m drilled. This drilling targeted lead-silver veins along strike from artisanal exposures at Small Canyon. Drilling at the Tshimpala project commenced in the last quarter of 2019 and was undertaken under an agreement with South African based drilling and exploration specialists Georoc. READ MORE: Force Commodities finalises contracts for Malawi mine Assays of the drilling, sent to SGS Australia for analyses, returned disappointing results, with the best intercept from SCA001 being 4.0 m at 328 ppm lead from 40 m depth. Whilst the results are disappointing, they do not reflect a lack of prospectivity shown by the Grand Canyon prospect, where mapping shows the Grand Canyon to be a bigger and more well developed vein system. The higher priority Grand Canyon prospect was not drilled because the onset of the wet season made it impossible to build the access road into the prospect. After the rains commenced, the only access was that already completed to Small Canyon. Tshimpala exploration programme The Tshimpala project comprises a series of high-grade lead-silver veins cross-cutting folded, graphite-rich metamorphic rocks. The emplacement of three small artisanal pits has exposed the mineralisation at Small Canyon, Grand Canyon and Riverside. Small Canyon prospect At Small Canyon, the magnetic anomaly lies north of previous small-scale artisanal mining activities, being amphibolitic gneiss. Small Canyon lies on the contact, the mineralised vein structure being east-west in strike and dipping north at the margins of an electro-magnetic high. The lode structure in the pit dips 60° to the north. The lode structure is mapped in the west of the pit, being associated with a less magnetic feature to the north and a low magnetic feature to the south.