ASX-listed Volt Resources has commenced exploration programs at its Guinea gold projects located in the Siguiri Basin, which forms part of the richly mineralised West African Birimian Gold Belt. Early exploration activities include systematic soil sampling combined with mapping and sampling of artisanal mining pits and shafts. The initial Konsolon program is estimated to be completed within 30 days. The follow-up programs will involve detailed mapping of generated soil geochemical targets and shallow auger drilling and sampling to analyse soil geochemistry. Volt has contracted Sahara Natural Resources, a mineral exploration consultancy and drilling company, to conduct exploration in its Kouroussa and Mandiana Projects. Sahara has staff on the ground and broad experience in the region and has recently been involved with PDI’s new greenfields gold discovery. The initial stages of the Sahara exploration program are scheduled to be completed in 17 weeks. The Konsolon Project exploration program is being undertaken by Volt’s newly formed Guinea team comprising three geologists led by one expatriate senior geologist. Volt’s geology team has already mobilized to site to commence the Konsolon Project exploration program and Sahara will soon mobilize to commence the Kouroussa and Mandiana Projects exploration program. Volt has commenced the early works on the Guinea projects to fast track the drill target generation phase on these highly prospective tenements. Related articles:Volt Resources bids for second gold projectVolt Resources to acquire gold project in Guinea Volt Resources Chairman, Asimwe Kabunga, comments: “After a recent successful exploration campaign at Lindian which led to the discovery of a world class high-grade conglomerate bauxite deposit in Guinea, we’re pleased for the newly formed Volt team to again be working with the Sahara team on this exciting gold project. Read more about gold “Against the backdrop of Sahara’s role in the recent spectacular success of Predictive Discovery’s drilling program, including a gold intersection of 46m@6.58g/t, combined with evidence of gold mineralisation trending through our adjacent Kouroussa permits, Volt Resources is excited to get the exploration activities underway and looks forward to providing the results of the exploration programs in due course.”