The broad range of custom designed mineral processing equipment from Vibramech caters for the variables that may affect the feed rate across these processes. Screen designs not only ensures the correct ROM ore sizes to begin with, but also helps with the downstream processes to achieve a balanced production. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 4, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Process optimisation requires a well-balanced production process, from primary crushing and screening, through secondary scrubbing/screening, re-crushing and screening and finally, the coarse and fines dense media separation. As one of Africa’s largest manufacturer of vibrating mineral processing equipment, Vibramech has a current installed base of over 10 000 pieces of equipment. “We are proud to be the preferred supplier of vibrating equipment to project houses and mines in Southern Africa, and we have earned the reputation of being an OEM that designs and manufactures robust and durable screening equipment,” explains MD David Massey. The company supplies its equipment primarily to the mining and mineral processing industries. Although it delivers world-wide, as a proudly African company, it supplies predominantly screens throughout Africa, which is considered to be among the harshest and most aggressive environments in the world. Vibramech has extensive experience in gold, diamond, coal, iron ore, manganese, cobalt, platinum, chrome, nickel, uranium, copper, mineral sands and aggregate operations. Vibramech has developed a comprehensive range of vibrating screens, such as the multislope (or Banana), horizontal, inclined, double deck and dewatering. It also has a range of proven feeders, such as grizzly feeders, pan feeders, tubular feeders and grease tables. “Our design practice makes use of Finite Element Analysis and Strain Gauge Analysis to prove structural integrity, with detailed attention paid to wear protection and commonality of components to minimise spare parts inventories,” adds David Massey. Tailored for all conditions The company is cognisant that its designs need to cater for both abrasive and corrosive environments. As sound dynamic behaviour is essential to ensure vibrating equipment reliability, all equipment is built to perform within strict dynamic parameters. All internal mating surfaces are machined in order to maintain stringent dimensional tolerances. In addition, the company’s quality assurance programme makes provision for a full 3D vibration analysis to be conducted on all equipment In addition to continued new projects, Vibramech has constantly strived to provide clients with augmentations to their existing vibrating equipment. This enables the company to retrofit custom-made design enhancements to improve on the existing mechanical, wear and process related characteristics of any componentry which may need replacement. Issues such as drive type preference (geared exciters/vibrator motors), increased throughput, improved efficiency, reduced panel pegging and optimised spray configurations are all addressed during the retrofitting process. Presently the company consistently produces in excess of 500 vibrating units per annum and is historically, and continues to be the foremost supplier of vibrating equipment to the coal, diamond (land and marine) and platinum mines in southern Africa. Read more about Vibramech The company continues to negotiate numerous supply contracts with long-standing customers, an area of significant business-generation over the past number of years, despite tight economic conditions. Visit Vibramech’s homepage