Anglo American Platinum has noted various inaccurate reports regarding COVID-19 positive cases at its operations. To date, no employees or contractors have tested positive at any of its operations in South Africa and Zimbabwe. A contractor, who travelled from abroad with colleagues in March before the lockdown started, tested positive for COVID-19 upon his arrival in South Africa. In line with Anglo American Platinum’s protocols, which place the health and well-being of all employees and contractors first and foremost, the group of contractors was isolated and tested before they could proceed to Mogalakwena Complex to report for work. The contractor did not visit the site and has since tested negative for COVID-19. The proper disclosure processes in line with Government regulations and Anglo American’s internal protocols were followed. The recognised union was informed of the matter during our regular site engagements and the matter was also reported to the Minerals Council for inclusion in their public reporting of cases in the mining industry. Amplats has since also received confirmation that the spouses of two employees at Amandelbult have tested positive for COVID-19. The employees and their family members have since been tested. One family all tested negative, and the company is waiting for the test results for the second family. As part of Amplat’s WeCare programme, it has put extensive measures in place to combat the spread of the virus in the workplace and its host communities. These measures include the establishment of testing facilities, the implementation of extensive health screening measures, securing isolation and quarantine facilities for employees and their families, and appointing additional medical support staff. The WeCare programme requires all employees to self-screen for symptoms and log their results on an app every day before they report for work. Where symptoms are recorded, initial medical support is provided at home. These measures are in addition to the screening measures at the workplace, as well as the extensive social distancing, hygiene and sanitation, and de-densification protocols that have been implemented. Amplats is confident that it has the required systems in place to ensure it deals with suspected infections in a safe and timeous manner, and that it can test its employees, trace possible contacts where needed, and provide the necessary support where required. All COVID-19  protocols at the workplace have been implemented in close collaboration with and the approval of the recognised unions at operations and exceed the minimum requirements set by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy’s directive and the Minerals Council’s Standard Operating Procedure. Read more about COVID-19 Amplats appeals to members of the public to desist from spreading unconfirmed reports during this time. Should cases of COVID-19 be detected and confirmed at operations, the company will report these transparently, and in line with the requirements set by various government authorities and industry bodies.