The World Federation of Diamond Bourses has announced the launch of its Young Diamantaires website. The organization has worked for the past four years with young members of the diamond community all over the world to create a platform through which they can express their thoughts, opinions and views in a safe and constructive manner. The website itself was physically built by the members for the members. It is in its first iteration and there are plans to expand its functionality.Rami Baron, Chairman of the Promotion Committee of the WFDB and founder of the Young Diamantaires describes the four pillars as the foundation from which the group will grow: The group has already been a beneficiary of a De Beers programme as part of which the Company invited 25 members to visit the Venetian mines in South Africa, as highlighted on the website.“The diamond industry over its long history has been shaped and nurtured by many different generations of diamantaires,” says Yoram Dvash, Acting President, WFDB. “We are happy to see the younger members of our industry actively engaging in discussions regarding critical issues and exploring how they can build on the rich legacy of this industry.” “We are bringing together people who would never get the opportunity to meet. We introduced discussions on topics that Young Diamantaires wanted to discuss but didn’t have the opportunities to do so. As a founding member I am extremely proud of what we have achieved to date,” says Rachel Sahar, in charge of Public Relations for the YDs. “We saw firsthand the tremendous work De Beers was doing within the community and felt, as Young Diamantaires, we needed to contribute. Currently, our committees from South Africa, UK and Australia are defining the framework to deliver results into the future,” comments Tamara Gabay, who looks after Fundraising for YDs. “Building this website meant we can express ourselves visually the way we wanted,” noted Harsh Shah and Chris Zoettli, handling Website Development at YDs. Read more about diamonds and gemstones “We were given total freedom, and have plans to add functionality to the site. The site will never be a trading platform, but a resource centre for Young Diamantaires worldwide, to help them improve and grow their businesses.” Access the website here