With attendance figures surpassing the 6,500 mark, this year’s Investing in African Mining Indaba was bigger, better and bolder than ever before. The event, which took place in Cape Town in February, was attended by delegates from the entire viewing chain. Among the attendees were one president, one prime minister and 39 ministers, as well as an increased number of junior miners (23% up) and investors (8% up). This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 4, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Attendees came from 92 countries – 66% from Africa, 16% from Europe, 7% from Oceania, 6% from Asia and 5% from North America. As always, there were more investors than any other African mining event, with +830 attending from Canada, the US, China, Australia and the UK, just to name a few. Project status preference ranged from development (78.2%) to exploration (46.06%) and production (74.1%). This proves that Mining Indaba has gone right back to its investment-driving and deal-making roots. Mining Indaba’s custom-built intelligent matchmaking system ensured that investors maximised the productivity of their meetings, with dedicated space provided in which to meet confidentially. Meanwhile, the Investor Pavilion Restricted Area, home to the investor lounge and junior mining showcase, encouraged organic interactions. ESG and tech led the way This year’s theme was ‘optimising growth and investment in a digitised mining economy’. In total, 346 speakers, and a 30% female line-up took to the stage over four days Environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues proved to be the most pervasive during the week. The main stage saw several hard-hitting discussions around the role of the industry in addressing climate change, decarbonisation and sustainability measures. On other stages, the Mining 2050 stream was extended to two full days due to popular demand.  Topics included: the future of work, economic growth through innovation, AI and many more. Meanwhile, the Investment Battlefield was set up to elevate the profile of emerging companies with projects with a market cap of $50 million or below, allowing junior miners the opportunity to compete for investor funding. Explorers and developers in battery metals, bulk and base metals, precious metals and energy minerals battled it out in front of a panel of high-profile judges. Mark Strizek, MD of Tietto Minerals impressed the judges with his pitch “Fast tracking the development of the Abujar gold project” and emerged as the 2020 champion. Click here to experience our multi-media from Mining Indaba The project is located approximately 30 km from the major regional city of Daloa in central western Côte d’Ivoire and the current resource stands at 45.5 Mt at 1.5g gold for 2.15 Moz of contained gold. Next year’s Mining Indaba will take place from 8 to 11 February 2021. Click here for more information.