Innovative and consultative mineral processing company Grinding Solutions Limited (GSL) which works globally with clients covering the metalliferous, coal, industrial minerals and oil field industries, has a unique approach to solving client problems. The company does so without preconceptions to help maximise mineral value and opportunities in order to meet the ever-increasing global energy and environmental challenges that the mining industry faces. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 9, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here GSL offers a range of consultancy and laboratory services including metallurgical and mineral processing testing from bench to pilot scale and has an in-house pilot plant facility. The company’s projects range from initial scoping through to preliminary economic assessments, prefeasibility studies to definitive feasibility studies and include plant optimisation, troubleshooting, plant audits and due diligence work. The services are all underpinned by expert knowledge and experience. A wealth of experience in a range of minerals processing techniques GSL has a wealth of experience in gold processing including mineralogical deportment studies, diagnostic leaching, gravity pre-concentrating, biox, flotation, Andre Laplante GRG, cyanide leaching, detoxification and recovery, carbon loading kinetics, Merrill Crowe testing and refractory gold processing covering projects based in North America, Europe, the Middle East and Africa, including AIM and TSXV-listed Altus Strategies’ Diba gold project in Mali. In addition to its experience in gold, the company also has excellent experience in base metal and heavy mineral processing, completing numerous laboratory and plant projects in recent years. These projects have ranged from initial scoping studies, variability studies, process optimisation test work and full plant audits and due diligence work. Many of these projects are complex VMS separations and fine/heavy mineral recoveries. In comminution, GSL are world leaders in ceramic media testing and ultrafine grinding, with a comprehensive range of fine grinding mills. It also carries out a full range of comminution testing and work in conjunction with equipment suppliers to offer clients a comprehensive solution. Based in Cornwall, an area of the UK steeped in mining history, GSL has a global presence working with companies of all sizes in many regions of the world. The company was established almost 20 years ago and has expanded its facilities and services year on year with laboratory space of around 1 500m2 and a wide range of mineral processing services.