Supporting mines in their quest for zero-harm, Booyco Electronics’ CXS solution has leveraged technology to achieve new levels of safety in underground and surface mining environments. “The Booyco CXS solution is engineered to mitigate the risk of collisions between pedestrians and vehicles, or between vehicles, in operational environments,” says Booyco Electronics CEO Anton Lourens. Read more about Booyco Electronics “This system takes the vital step from being just a warning system to becoming a collision avoidance system.” Lourens highlights that the Booyco CXS is a best-of-breed system that consolidates everything the company has learnt in its 15 years of serving the sector. By upgrading to a new hardware platform, the system’s software updates can be conducted remotely and more frequently – providing increased functionality. It also allows users to comply with the latest and ever more stringent safety regulations. “Our Booyco CXS is a comprehensive and integrated response to Level 7, Level 8 and Level 9 safety levels – as defined by the Earth Moving Equipment Safety Round Table (EMESRT),” he says. The new hardware platform is based on principles proven by Booyco Electronics over many years. Technology includes the reliable and accurate Very Low Frequency (VLF) technology for pedestrian detection, and GPS and radio frequency technology for vehicle detection in surface applications. “At the heart of the system is the Booyco Host Unit (BHU),” Lourens says. “This receives information from the pedestrian sensors, the trackless mining machine (TMM) sensors and the wheeled mobile equipment sensors. It then conducts the necessary proximity calculations and algorithms to alert users to any impending risk scenarios.” Lourens also emphasises that this BHU integrates seamlessly with original equipment manufacturer (OEM) systems, either directly or through a third-party interface in accordance with ISO 21815. “This allows the Booyco CXS to apply Level 9 intervention instructions to the machine, as required to for example automatically slowing it down or bringing it to a complete stop,” he says. “Our flexible, comprehensive approach with the Booyco CXS solution has been developed to ensure that all customers can achieve Level 9 compliance, irrespective of the age of their machines.”