“Industry is eager to engage, ask questions, find solutions and close deals” A digital mining invasion is expected next week when Nigeria Mining Week’s Digital Event gathers the industry for one of Africa’s most exciting investment destinations. The Nigerian authorities are focused and ready to promote the country’s mining sector’s future and the opportunities it offers investors and project developers. The programme for the upcoming Nigeria Mining Week Digital Event, taking place from 12-16 October, offers an extensive range of sessions that showcases how the various sectors are gearing up for a veritable explosion of the mining industry. These range from finance, to powering the mines, to formalising artisanal mining and showcasing the different opportunities and success stories in a number of Nigerian States. Programme highlights include:KEYNOTE SESSION: Monday, 12 October 2020 – 10:00 -11:30 WAT– Welcome addressAlh. Kabir Mohammed Kankara, President, Miners Association of Nigeria (MAN), Nigeria – Welcome addressUyi Akpata, Country Senior Partner, PwC, Nigeria – Welcome addressHon. Arc. Olamilekan Adegbite, Minister, Ministry of Mines and Steel Development, Nigeria Legal and regulatory update: MONDAY, 12 October, 2020 – 13:30 – 14:35 WATGet to grips with the mining legal landscape in Nigeria and receive insight into the various mining principles, acts and regulations which govern the industry and how they apply to specific strategic commodities. Participants:– Ibrahim A. Abdullahi, Special Adviser to the Governor, Nasarawa State, Nigeria– Victoria R Nalule, Research Fellow: Extractives Hub, University of Dundee, UK– Senator Umaru Tanko Al-Makura, Chairman Senate Committee on Solid Minerals, Mines, Steel Development and Metallurgy– Engr. Obadiah Simon Nkom, Director General, Nigeria Mining Cadastre, Nigeria– Tobenna Nnamani, Senior Associate, Punuka Attorneys & Solicitors, Nigeria More programme session highlights: Who’s who in mining speaker line-upThe online platform will feature a who’s who of expert speakers and industry leaders, including: Digital Event – what to expect“It is clear that the industry is eager to engage, ask questions, find solutions and close deals,” says Sabrina Tab. “The Nigeria Mining Week Digital Event will offer five days of free, interactive content and engagement with an expected 2000 attendees.” The online platform will host nine webinar sessions, four technology shootouts, nine roundtables, a matchmaking platform and an exclusive interview series with key stakeholders from the mining industry. Some 30 sponsors and exhibitors will participate, proving that Nigeria’s mining sector is becoming a key destination, not only for investment but for local and international industry suppliers of specialised services and technology. TO REGISTER to attend the event for free and to view the full programme and speakers on the event website: https://www.nigeriaminingweek.com/digital-event Successful transition to digitalThe Nigerian mining sector has come out in full support of the Digital Event. The organisers recently announced several high-level sponsorships by longstanding partners who are well-known in-country entrepreneurs, expert advisories and project pioneers. Emotan Global Ventures Limited are the returning diamond sponsors for both the digital and the live events, while AG Vision, Minelab, Nigachem Nigeria Ltd, PUNUKA, PW Nigeria (PWN), Rapidlink, Udo Udoma & Belo-Osagie (UUBO) an Vetifly are all gold sponsors. Nigeria Mining Week is organised by the Miners Association of Nigeria (MAN) in collaboration with PwC and Clarion Events Africa and is supported by the Ministry of Mines and Steel Development. This year marks the fifth edition of the event, which has garnered increasing interest over the years. Clarion Events Africa is a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Other well-known events by Clarion Events Africa include Africa Mining Forum, DRC Mining Week, African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa, Utility CEO Forums, Future Energy East Africa and Future Energy Nigeria. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group. Nigeria Mining Week dates and location:Digital Nigeria Mining Week keynote opening session: 12 October 2020Digital conference: 12-16 October 2020Online networking sessions: 12-16 October 2020 Live conference and exhibition: 11-13 October 2021Live location: International Convention Centre, Abuja, Nigeria Website: https://www.nigeriaminingweek.com/Twitter:  https://twitter.com/NigeriaMWFacebook:  https://www.facebook.com/Nigeriaminingweek/LinkedIN: https://www.linkedin.com/company/nigeria-mining-week/ Media contact:Senior communications manager: Annemarie RoodbolOffice: +27 21 700 3558Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com