September 2020 saw the launch of BOVA’s new range of locally manufactured Fall Arrest Equipment that has extended the brand from an entry level category player into the mid-tier working at heights category. Featuring three harnesses and a range of lanyards and accessories, BOVA combined the research and in-depth understanding of the category gained from their position on the SABS Working from Heights Technical Committee, with real-time industry insights and best practice knowledge gained through their membership with the Institute for Working at Heights. Read more TECH NEWS The result is a range of products that cater to all non-fire/heat related working at heights requirements. In designing the new harnesses, Ruaan Breedt, Working at Heights Technical Specialist at BBF Safety Group stated, “There are a large number of harness options in the working at heights category, and this can be confusing to end-users, with the multiple variations in hardware and padding. Read more about safety “We wanted to focus on designing harnesses that meet the requirements of Rope Access & Rescue, Multi-purpose use and undergrounding mining, thereby covering all the functionalities of non-fire / heat related working at heights harnesses with just three styles.” The three harnesses in the range: With careful consideration of both the requirements and challenges of individuals working from heights in these environments, BOVA paid attention to the placement of padding as well as the types of hardware fitted on each harness to ensure the perfect balance between functionality and safety that is so common in their fit for purpose philosophy. “There is often a misconception that the more padding featured on a harness, the better. This is not necessarily the case. Padding, if not serving a purpose to displace pressure over a wider-area thereby improving comfort in a highly dangerous position, can lead to a heat build-up in that area that results in damp and uncomfortable equipment for the wearer” adds Breedt. The harness range is complemented by industries most commonly used lanyards  in the mid-tier category: The range also features a work positioning lanyard and endless round climbing sling. Senior Brand Manager, Vanessa Roland says, “We are proud of the consideration that was put into the work positioning lanyard and the endless round sling. “Our work positioning lanyard features a PVC protector that protects the webbing against abrasive edges and liquids that could be found on the element that it is being wound around.” “Our endless round slings are manufactured from seat belt webbing that is then encased into a tubular webbing to enhance the performance and improve the safety of the product. “Not only is our endless round sling manufactured in accordance with SANS 50797 standards, but unlike many products in the market, it has also been tested and certified according to those standards,” adds Ronald. Every item in the new range is packaged in a reusable drawstring bag that provides a protective storage solution. As multiple size options and product types can be available on a site at any time, each bag features a full colour tag with product graphic and colour coded sizes for easy stock identification. Further included in the drawstring bags are a comprehensive full colour user manual and inspection sheet. “We put a great deal of thought into the design and layout of our user-manual. We wanted to create something that would easily communicate the legal requirements as well as best in practice principals to encourage users to revisit the manual and keep the information top of mind. “We also trust that the professionally laid out inspection sheets will further encourage individuals to perform their checks when required, which will ultimately create a safer working environment for all,” adds Roland Proudly manufactured in South Africa, in their ISO 9001 accredited facility in Johannesburg, the new Artisan range by BOVA Safety Wear is available to order now through your local distributor from a fully stocked warehouse.