Following the official signing ceremony on 22 January 2020, Worley has been appointed by Group Technology, a division of Sasol South Africa, as the engineering contractor partner. The five-year agreement will see Worley providing engineering, procurement and construction services for Sasol’s capital projects portfolio, including efficiency improvement and environmental initiatives, from front-end engineering design to project completion. Worley’s Energy & Chemicals Services business in South Africa, jointly owned by Worley and Matasis Investments, offers global expertise to help energy, chemicals and power customers develop, build and maintain technically complex facilities. As a leading global provider of professional project and asset services in the energy, chemicals and resources sectors, Worley has the capacity and expertise to offer Sasol superior portfolio management and project delivery. The company’s approach to project execution focuses on innovation and best practices, and includes systems and tools to drive safety and efficiency throughout all phases of project delivery. Frans Oosthuizen, Worley’s Southern Africa Senior Business Development Manager for E&C Services, says that the engineering contractor partnership with Group Technology will enable Worley to make a significant impact on Sasol’s project execution performance in the country and empower the business to help shape and improve the engineering and construction landscape in South Africa. As Sasol’s engineering contractor partner, Worley will not only be closely collaborating with local companies in the South African design and construction industry, but will also provide training and upskilling for young graduates and artisans. “Worley will play an important role in developing talent in the local market. This includes working with our various construction and supplier partners to develop young engineering and artisan talent to advance their career opportunities and supply the industry with needed skills.” Having successfully worked with Sasol as a long-term contributor to its project delivery operations, Worley has a deep understanding of the company’s culture and requirements. Worley’s existing presence on site in Secunda will ensure a smooth and effective transition towards a mature partnership. Further strengths that Worley brings to the partnership include: Ed Hanbidge, Worley’s Vice President for Energy & Chemicals Services in Southern and Eastern Africa, says the company is excited to share the best of their global partnership experience with Sasol, while forging a partnership model based on the fundamental principles of trust, integrity and commitment. Partnership Executive Sponsor and Energy & Chemicals Services Group President, Vinayak Pai, adds that Worley is fully committed to Sasol and to this partnership. “As Executive Sponsor, and as a trusted partner to Sasol, we will successfully implement and grow this partnership, setting new standards in terms of project delivery, innovation and transformation within the South African industry.” Worley is the largest energy, chemicals and resources services company in the world, setting itself apart by focusing on establishing and maintaining long-term, preferred relationships with its customers. Operating in over 50 countries worldwide, and with over 35 years of experience in South Africa, Worley’s global expertise coupled with a deep understanding of the country’s unique challenges will enable the company to tailor solutions that will deliver maximum value to Sasol. Visit Worley’s website