Sibanye-Stillwater has provided an update regarding organizational structure changes, designed to enhance delivery and strategic focus. Richard Stewart, currently Executive Vice President (EVP): Business Development has been promoted to Group COO effective 1 December 2020. Richard joined the Group in 2014 and has been instrumental in executing the groups external growth and business development strategies. Richard has over 20 years’ experience in the mining sector and holds a Phd in geology. Read more about gold mining Laurent Charbonnier will be joining the company and assuming the role of EVP Business Development. Laurent has more than 20 years’ experience in investment banking and recently left his role as Managing director and Global Head of Metals & Mining for HSBC, which he occupied for the last eight years. Read more about platinum group metals He was a lead advisor to Sibanye-Stillwater on the acquisitions of Aquarius Platinum, Rustenburg, Stillwater and Lonmin and their related financing (bridge financing, rights issue and bonds). Following the untimely passing of Chris Bateman on 6 September 2020, Wayne Robinson (currently EVP: SA PGM operations) has been appointed EVP: Montana operations. Wayne has worked in the South African gold and platinum mining sectors for more than 25 years. Lerato Legong, who joined the Group in early 2020 as SVP Legal and Compliance, has been promoted to EVP: Legal and Compliance. He has served both in private practice and as in-house counsel in the mining industry over a 17-year period. Group CEO Neal Froneman comments: “Sibanye-Stillwater has come a long way since the listing of Sibanye Gold in 2013. We are a close knit and strong team that has grown through our experiences. “I am confident that these changes in the executive team will further bolster our ability to deliver value as we execute our strategic intent of ensuring operating excellence across the Group. The organisational transition is ongoing and I look forward to providing further clarity in due course.” Read more about Sibanye-Stillwater