From humble beginnings 80 years ago, today Wayne Safety has grown to be Africa’s largest and leading gumboot specialist. The company started manufacturing gumboots with Wayne Rubber producing rubber gumboots in KwaZulu-Natal. This began a long tradition of manufacturing superior quality gumboots and serving workers right at the heart of industry. Today, Wayne Safety is the largest and leading PVC and PU gumboot manufacturer in Africa. This article first appeared in Mining Review Africa Issue 9, 2020Read the full digimag here or subscribe to receive a print copy here Since 1940, the company has only focused on what it does best – gumboots, and gumboots alone – allowing it to emerge as specialist in its field and pioneers in both innovation and quality. Miners have worn the company’s iconic Egoli gumboot for almost 40 years, fondly referring to them as ‘mdala-scathu’ (mdala iscathulo), which loosely translates to “the old-timer shoes”, because they are known to stand the test of time. Read more about safety Wayne is the first gumboot manufacturer in Africa to install its own PVC compounding plant which allowed for greater quality control and a quicker manufacturing process. In 2014, the company became the first (and remains the only) PU gumboot manufacturer in Africa. Furthermore, Over the years, the company has worked on reducing it carbon footprint in line with it objective of sustainability, and today it produces 35% of all it gumboots from recycled materials. The Duralight 1 is well-recognised in agricultural sectors and incorporates a mix of virgin and recycled PVC that results in a high-quality, yet cost-effective, recycled gumboot upon which our customers can trust and rely. In 2015, Wayne was the first to introduce a fully-integrated metatarsal PVC gumboot to market that was EN20345-accredited. All its gumboots are compliant with all safety standards and regulations, and are manufactured in an ISO 9001 accredited factory to ensure quality. This has allowed the company to compete with international brands and expand its global footprint to over 40 countries. After 80 years of specialised gumboot manufacturing, innovation and technical achievement, Wayne Safety remains a proudly-South African company that supports and services the local economy. Today, the company is the preferred choice in for PVC and PU gumboots in African mining operations.