Three finalists have been chosen to compete for the title of Innovation of the year in the Swedish Mining Innovations Award of 2020. Read more: Sandvik pushes the boundaries of mining automation Established in 2019, the Swedish Mining Innovations Award is awarded by the national strategic innovation programme Swedish Mining Innovation, and rewards companies for their innovations aimed at achieving a sustainable future in the mining sector. Swedish Mining Innovation aims to strengthen Swedish competitiveness and create sustainable solutions for the Swedish mining and metals industry through innovation projects, training, seminars and meetings, as well as internationalization. The three finalists are Orexplore for their X-ray technology for drill cores, Widefind for their positioning system for people and equipment and Minalyze for their scanner of large volumes of drill core samples. All innovations move the industry towards increased efficiency, which affects both sustainability and profitability. Read more: Innovation drives South Africa’s underground mining industry Two of the finalists, Orexplore and Minalyze, have innovations that help to map and assess deposits in a more efficient way than is done today. This is a challenge for mining companies around the world and the market for these innovations is large. The third finalist Widefind has a unique solution that enables a very accurate positioning of both people and assets underground, something that is extremely important from both a safety and efficiency perspective. Here, too, the market is judged to be large and international. Through their innovations, which are of strategic global importance, these Swedish firms are putting Swedish mining innovation on the international map. The fact that the jury has chosen two finalists with similar application areas, Orexplore and Minalyze, shows that the innovations are important to the future sustaibability of the mining industry, says Jenny Greberg, programme director of Swedish Mining Innovation and chairman of the jury. This year’s theme of ‘smart solutions’ was captured in the finalists’ innovation and go a long way in solving the industry’s problems, with the potential of making major improvements in the industry. “We also see a consistent theme that successful innovations come from our Swedish collaboration model. Many of the nominated innovations have been developed in collaboration with different types of actors,” says Greberg. The jury consists of Greberg, Lennart Evrell – board member of SCA, the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise, ICA and Epiroc; Maria Sunér Flemming – CEO at Svemin; and Margareta Groth – unit manager for industrial development at Vinnova. The final winner of the Swedish Mining Innovation Award will be announced on 17 November.