The South-African Nerospec Group and the German Schmidt Kranz Group have joined forces to implement flexible wireless automation and digitalization enabling its customers to be part of the 4th mining revolution for connected mining. The two companies signed a shareholder agreement this month to form the new German entity Nerospec SK GmbH. Nerospec Group is renowned for its reliable wireless communication and machine control technology (particularly Proximity Detection to Trackless Mining Machine Interface and Control solutions) within sub-Saharan Africa. Read more TECH NEWS “Founding Nerospec SK is part of our strategy of expanding our global business and delivering a promising new generation of specialized underground mining technology products” says Michael Bruno, CEO and founder of Nerospec Group. “Our objective is to innovate underground wireless connectivity solutions, perfect data acquisition and control systems, enhance edge computing and apply the industries best-in-class automation technologies. “In so doing we are advancing the automation of ore extraction processes, specifically within the harsh and unforgiving underground mining environment”. Nerospec SK offers specialized underground mining technology to the existing global customer base. The technology is OEM-independent and is tailored by Nerospec SK specifically in accordance with individual customer requirements. This way, their solutions can add maximum value to customers worldwide through improved connectivity, timeous decision-informing information and automation techniques, for any brand, type and generation of machine. Schmidt Kranz Group has a wide array of products and services for the mining industry and operates in 25 countries. “Our combined underground mining knowledge providing for the efficient implementation of our digital solutions will hoist productivities to a new level. “At reasonable cost we support our customers with reliable cutting-edge technology keeping their miners safe and at the same time increasing transparency of their operations”, explains Mortimer Glinz, CEO and shareholder of Schmidt Kranz Group.