The organisers of Africa Mining Forum have announced a unique digital ESG* partnership with The Stakeholder Company (TSC). *Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance “We are very excited to have TSC on board,” says Africa Mining Forum event manager, Elodie Delagneau. “Along with our media partner Mining Review Africa, we look forward to learning from their particular expertise in using AI in managing stakeholder relations and, of course, sharing this specialised and visionary knowledge with our clients and other partners.” During the upcoming Africa Mining Forum’s five-day digital event from 16-20 November 2020, The Stakeholder Company is the sponsor of the Spotlight session focusing on: “Managing ESG Compliance and Investor Expectations.”  Terence Lyons, TSC CEO and founder, is also a speaker.Using the power of AI“Clarion Events Africa is the convenor of Africa Mining Forum and TSC is the global mining stakeholder and issue system,” says Terence. “It’s a perfect match and we look forward to this partnership connecting Africa using the power of AI.” He adds: “ESG mining standards are the key to sustainable production. Rather than being a simple obligation, ESGs have the potential to unlock and become the pillar of sustainable competitive advantage. Investors are realising that companies with a strong ESG track record outperform their peer group, and this has become especially apparent over the global pandemic.” Here is a sneak preview of the Spotlight session that will take place on 17 November: Spotlight #4: Managing ESG Compliance and Investor ExpectationsDeveloping a financially profitable project is no longer the only key aspect investors are considering to fund new projects. Mining companies’ ability to comply with environmental, social and governance components is today an equal investment consideration. With three critical components that must all be considered, gain insight into finding innovative solutions that jointly deliver compliance as a cohesive whole and not individual parts. Moderated by: Laura Cornish, Editor in chief, Mining Review Africa Presented by:•        Rudolph de Bruin, Partner, AMED Funds•        Terence Lyons, CEO, TSC – The Stakeholder Company•        Errol Smart,  Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, Orion MineralsDigital line-upAlthough this year’s live Africa Mining Forum had to be postponed until November next year, organiser Clarion Events Africa will host the five-day, comprehensive digital line-up this year that will include: • 12 Strategic Spotlights• Women in Mining Assembly• Ministerial Forum• Matchmaking• Mining Market Place About Africa Mining ForumEarlier this year the mining industry recently gained an exciting new multi-touchpoint partner when Africa Mining Forum transformed into a year-round platform, providing engagement and content for 365 days a year, covering all corners of the continent’s junior mining activities and opportunities.This mining investment platform has its roots in the very successful East & Central Africa Mining Forum, which took place in Kigali last year, hosted by the Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (RMB). Event organiser Clarion Events Africa is a leading Cape Town-based and multi-award winning organiser of exhibitions and conferences across the continent in the infrastructure, energy and mining sectors. Other well-known events by Clarion Events Africa include DRC Mining Week, Nigeria Mining Week, African Utility Week & POWERGEN Africa, Utility CEO Forums, Future Energy East Africa and Future Energy Nigeria. The company is part of the UK-based Clarion Events Group. African Mining Forum dates and location:Digital event: 16-20 November 2020365 days a year digital engagement: Watch this space!Onsite event in Kigali: November 2021Website: https://www.africaminingforum.com/Twitter:  https://twitter.com/MiningForumAfrFacebook:  https://www.facebook.com/africaminingforum  LinkedIN: Africa Mining ForumMedia contact:Senior communications manager: Annemarie RoodbolOffice: +27 21 700 3558Email: annemarie.roodbol@clarionevents.com